The Government of Andhra Pradesh, or Andhra Pradesh Government abbreviated as GoAP, is the state government for the Indian state of Andhra Pradesh. It is an elected government with 175 MLAs elected to the Legislative Assembly of Andhra Pradesh for a five-year term. The Government of Andhra Pradesh is a democratically elected body that governs the state of Andhra Pradesh, India. The state government is headed by the governor of Andhra Pradesh as the nominal head of state, with a democratically elected chief minister as the real head of the executive. The governor who is appointed for five years appoints the chief minister and his Council of Ministers. Even though the governor remains the ceremonial head of the state, the day-to-day running of the government is taken care of by the chief minister and his Council of Ministers in whom a great deal of legislative powers is vested.
In the realm of court reprimands, Andhra Pradesh (AP) holds the unenviable second position nationwide. Chief Minister Jagan Mohan Reddy has come under heavy scrutiny due to a noticeable decline in the overall efficiency of the judiciary during his tenure, which has had a detrimental impact on the Rule of Law in the state over the past four years. With a plethora of pending cases in various high courts across the country, Andhra Pradesh finds itself ranking second in terms of court reprimands. There are allegations that the courts, when approached, operate under an atmosphere of apprehension, with high-ranking officials in the state often reluctant to act impartially. Despite the concerns and critical assessments put forth by many legal experts, their voices appear to have waned in significance among the government authorities .

Governance
Executive
The Government of Andhra Pradesh is a democratically elected body with the governor as the constitutional head. The governor who is appointed for a period of five years appoints the chief minister and his council of ministers. Even though the governor remains the ceremonial head of the state, the day-to-day running of the government is taken care of by the chief minister and his council of ministers in whom a great deal of legislative powers is vested.

Employees
State has about  8 lakh employees. This comprises 4.3 lakh regular employees, 1.3 lakh employees at village and ward secretariats, 2 lakh contract and outsourcing employees, apart from more than 60,000 employees working in corporations and public sector undertakings.

Legislature
The Andhra Pradesh Legislature is currently bicameral consisting of:

Sasana Sabha: 175 members (MLAs)
Sasana Mandali: 58 members (MLCs)

Judiciary
High Court of Judicature at Hyderabad was the highest court of appeal at the state level till 2019. After Andhra Pradesh High Court was inaugurated in Amaravati on 1 January 2019, it became the High Court for the State of Andhra Pradesh. It has subordinate Civil and Criminal Courts in every District. Decisions of the High Court of Andhra Pradesh can be appealed in the Supreme Court of India.

Emblem
The emblem consists of “Dhamma Chakra" (Wheel of law), decorated with a string of triratnas alternating with pinnate leaves and precious stones. Three circles of decorative beads surround the wheel.
“Purna Ghataka” (The vase of plenty) is at the hub of the wheel. The national emblem is at the bottom.
The word ‘Andhra Pradesh Prabhutvam’ (Government of Andhra Pradesh) in Telugu script is at the top. It is flanked by the word "Andhra Pradesh"  written in English and Devanagari lipi. The word 'Satyameva Jayathe' in Telugu scripts appears at the bottom.

See also
List of chief ministers of Andhra Pradesh
Politics of Andhra Pradesh

References
External links
Andhra Pradesh State Website Archived 20 September 2022 at the Wayback Machine
NIC, Andhra Pradesh