{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the follows of the military rank of the author of the follows of the don flows home to the sea?", "correct_answer": "lieutenant colonel", "model_answer": " [/INST] Answer: The author of \"The Don Flows Home to the Sea\" is Mikhail Sholokhov. He is a Soviet/Russian novelist and a winner of the 1965 Nobel Prize in Literature", "context": "And Quiet Flows the Don or Quietly Flows the Don (Russian: \u0422\u0438\u0445\u0438\u0439 \u0414\u043e\u043d, literally \"Quiet Don\") is an epic novel in four volumes by Russian writer Mikhail Alexandrovich Sholokhov. The first three volumes were written from 1925 to 1932 and published in the Soviet magazine Oktyabr in 1928\u20131932, and the fourth volume was finished in 1940. The English translation of the first three volumes appeared under this title in 1934.The novel is considered one of the most significant works of world and Russian literature in the 20th century. It depicts the lives and struggles of Don Cossacks during the First World War, the Russian Revolution, and Russian Civil War. In 1965, Sholokhov was awarded the Nobel Prize for Literature for this novel. The authorship of the novel is contested by some literary critics and historians, who believe that it mostly was not written by Sholokhov.\nBagh-e Hutk (Persian: \u0628\u0627\u063a \u0647\u0648\u062a\u0643\u200e, also Romanized as 'B\u0101gh-e H\u016btk and B\u0101gh H\u016btk; also known B\u0101gh H\u016btak and B\u0101ghuk) is a village in Sirch Rural District, Shahdad District, Kerman County, Kerman Province, Iran. At the 2006 census, its population was 155, in 42 families.\nLieutenant colonel (pronounced Lef-ten-ent Kernel (UK & Commonwealth) or Loo-ten-ent Kernel (US)) is a rank of commissioned officer in the armies, most marine forces and some air forces of the world, above a major and below a colonel. The rank of lieutenant colonel is often shortened to simply \"colonel\" in conversation and in unofficial correspondence. Sometimes, the term 'half-colonel' is used in casual conversation in the British Army. A lieutenant colonel is typically in charge of a battalion or regiment in the army.\nThe Don Flows Home to the Sea (1940) is the second half of the great Don epic (Tikhii Don) written by Mikhail Sholokhov. It originally appeared in serialized form between 1928 and 1940. The English translation of the second half of this monumental work appeared under this title in 1940.The novel follows the fortunes of the Don Cossacks in peace and war, revolution and civil war. The novel depicts the destruction of Cossack society during the Civil War. Grigory Melekhov is the protagonist. The book tells of his tragic affair with Aksinia, the wife of a neighbour, and how he fights for the Reds, the Whites, and the Partisans.Much of the novel used an earlier, unpublished story Sholokhov wrote in 1925 about the Kornilov affair.\nAnne McGrath (born c.\u20091958) was principal secretary to former Alberta Premier Rachel Notley. She was previously deputy chief of staff from January to June 2016 before being promoted to her current position.McGrath served as the National Director of the New Democratic Party (NDP) of Canada (2014-2015), and chief of staff to Jack Layton, the late leader of the NDP. As Chief of Staff to Jack Layton (2008\u20132011), she is credited with professionalizing caucus operations and with helping organize the party's historic breakthrough to Official Opposition status. She stayed on as chief of staff to interim party leader Nycole Turmel and the federal NDP Caucus, during Turmel's interim leadership. She was president of the party from 2006 to 2009; she was elected on September 10, 2006 at the party's convention in Quebec City and her term ended on August 16, 2009 when Peggy Nash was elected president at the party's convention in Halifax. Before that, she had been director of operations for the NDP federal caucus.She is a frequent commentator on national media broadcasts and has been identified as one of the 100 most influential people in government and politics in Ottawa. She has been an activist in the labour, student and women's movements  and had been employed by CUPE National as Director of Equality and as executive assistant to CUPE's national president Judy Darcy, and by Oxfam Canada. In 1993, McGrath was the Alberta New Democratic Party's candidate in Calgary-Bow. In 1995 she was its candidate in a provincial by-election in Calgary-McCall and came in third place. McGrath was the NDP candidate in Calgary-Varsity in the 2019 Alberta general election.She was portrayed by Wendy Crewson in the 2013 CBC Television film Jack.\nShunyo (Bengali: \u09b6\u09c2\u09a3\u09cd\u09af; English: Zero) is a 2013 Bengali film directed by Rudranil Ghosh, produced by Workshop Productions Pvt. Ltd. and starring Anjan Dutt.\nMikhail Aleksandrovich Sholokhov (Russian: \u041c\u0438\u0445\u0430\u0438\u0301\u043b \u0410\u043b\u0435\u043a\u0441\u0430\u0301\u043d\u0434\u0440\u043e\u0432\u0438\u0447 \u0428\u043e\u0301\u043b\u043e\u0445\u043e\u0432, IPA: [\u02c8\u0282ol\u0259x\u0259f]; 24 May [O.S. 11 May] 1905 \u2013 21 February 1984) was a Soviet/Russian novelist and winner of the 1965 Nobel Prize in Literature. He is known for writing about life and fate of Don Cossacks during the Russian Revolution, the civil war and the period of collectivization, primarily in his most famous novel, And Quiet Flows the Don.\nColonel ( \"kernel\"; abbreviated Col., Col or COL) is a senior military officer rank below the brigadier and general officer ranks. However, in some small military forces, such as those of Monaco or the Vatican, colonel is the highest rank. It is also used in some police forces and paramilitary organizations.Historically, in the seventeenth, eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, a colonel was typically in charge of a regiment in an army. Modern usage varies greatly, and in some cases, the term is used as an honorific title that may have no direct relationship to military service.The rank of colonel is typically above the rank of lieutenant colonel. The rank above colonel is typically called brigadier, brigade general or brigadier general.Equivalent naval ranks may be called captain or ship-of-the-line captain. In the Commonwealth air force rank system, the equivalent rank is group captain.\nNGC 4567 and NGC 4568 (nicknamed the Siamese Twins or the Butterfly Galaxies) are a set of unbarred spiral galaxies about 60 million light-years away in the constellation Virgo.  They were both discovered by William Herschel in 1784.  They are part of the Virgo cluster of galaxies.  Only one supernova (SN 2004cc) has been observed in the Siamese Twins.These galaxies are in the process of colliding and merging with each other, as studies of their distributions of neutral and molecular hydrogen show, with the highest star formation activity in the part where they overlap. However the system is still in an early phase of interaction.They were named \"Siamese Twins\" because they appear to be connected.\n", "path": ["the don flows home to the sea", "and quiet flows the don", "Michail Sholokhov", "colonel", "lieutenant colonel"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the parent taxon of geovibrio thiophilus?", "correct_answer": "geovibrio", "model_answer": " [/INST] The parent taxon of Geovibrio thiophilus is the family Deferribacteraceae.\n\nExplanation: Geovibrio is a genus of bacteria, and Deferribacteraceae is the family to which", "context": "Geovibrio thiophilus is a Gram-negative, non-spore-forming and sulfur-reducing bacterium from the genus of Geovibrio which has been isolated from a drainage ditch in Konstanz in Germany.\nDr. Otto Peters (born May 6, 1926) is the Founding Rector and professor emeritus at the FernUniversit\u00e4t (Distance Teaching University) in Hagen, Germany. He has made contributions to the conceptual development of distance education. His main theory was called The Industrial Model. In this monograph \"Distance education and industrial production: a comparative interpretation in outline\" (1967) he described distance education as the most industrialized form of teaching and learning. He incorporated business management terms to show the industrial characteristics of distance education such as division of labour, assembly line, mass production and planning.\nFrankenweenie is a 2012 American 3D stop-motion-animated dark fantasy horror comedy film directed by Tim Burton and produced by Walt Disney Pictures. It is a remake of Burton's 1984 short film of the same name and is a parody of and a homage to the 1931 film Frankenstein based on Mary Shelley's book of the same name. The voice cast includes four actors who worked with Burton on previous films: Winona Ryder (Beetlejuice and Edward Scissorhands); Martin Short (Mars Attacks!); Catherine O'Hara (Beetlejuice and The Nightmare Before Christmas); and Martin Landau (Ed Wood and Sleepy Hollow), along with some new voice actors, such as Charlie Tahan and Atticus Shaffer.Frankenweenie is in black and white. It is also the fourth stop-motion film produced by Burton and the first of those four that is not a musical. In the film, a boy named Victor loses his dog, a Bull Terrier named Sparky, and uses the power of electricity to resurrect him \u2014 but is then blackmailed by his peers into revealing how they too can reanimate their deceased past pets and other creatures, resulting in mayhem. The tongue-in-cheek film contains numerous references and parodies related to the book, past film versions of the book, other literary classics, and other films which Burton has directed.Frankenweenie, the first black-and-white feature film and the first stop-motion film to be released in IMAX 3D, was released on October 5, 2012 and met with positive reviews and moderate box office sales. The film won the Saturn Award for Best Animated Film and was nominated for an Academy Award; a Golden Globe; a BAFTA; and an Annie Award for Best Film in each respective animated category.\nGeovibrio is a Gram-negative, non-spore-forming, strictly anaerobic and motile genus of bacteria from the family of Deferribacteraceae.\nBarisis-aux-Bois, formerly called Barisis until 3 December 2014, is a French commune in the department of Aisne in the Hauts-de-France region of northern France.The inhabitants of the commune are known as Barisiens or Barisiennes\nIn Kind Direct is a charity in the United Kingdom founded in 1996 by the Prince of Wales. The charity distributes new donated usable consumer goods from manufacturers and retailers to UK charities working both domestically and abroad. The Prince of Wales is In Kind Direct's Royal founding patron.Since 1996, the charity has distributed \u00a3180 million in value of goods from more than 1,000 companies. 8,800 charities and not-for-profit organisations have received products via In Kind Direct, helping millions of people in need every year.\n", "path": ["geovibrio thiophilus", "geovibrio"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the capital of the country location of citizenship of the director of the country location of citizenship of richard john sinclair laws?", "correct_answer": "Brussels", "model_answer": " [/INST] The capital of the country where Richard John Sinclair Laws is from is Canberra, Australia. The country where Laws is from is also where Jean-Jacques Andrien, the Belgian film director, was born, but", "context": "Richard John Sinclair Laws, CBE (born 8 August 1935), also known as Lawsie, was from the 1970s until his retirement in 2007, the host of an Australian morning radio program combining music with interviews, opinion, live advertising readings and listener talkback. His distinctive voice earned him the nickname \"the Golden Tonsils\".Despite retiring in 2007, Laws' management confirmed in November 2010 that he would be returning to radio in February 2011, as the host of a morning programme on 2SM and the Super Radio Network.\nAustralia, officially the Commonwealth of Australia, is a sovereign country comprising the mainland of the Australian continent, the island of Tasmania, and numerous smaller islands. It is the largest country in Oceania and the world's sixth-largest country by total area. The neighbouring countries are Papua New Guinea, Indonesia, and East Timor to the north; the Solomon Islands and Vanuatu to the north-east; and New Zealand to the south-east. The population of 25 million is highly urbanised and heavily concentrated on the eastern seaboard. Australia's capital is Canberra, and its largest city is Sydney. The country's other major metropolitan areas are Melbourne, Brisbane, Perth, and Adelaide.Indigenous Australians inhabited the continent for about 65,000 years prior to European discovery with the arrival of Dutch explorers in the early 17th century, who named it New Holland. In 1770, Australia's eastern half was claimed by Great Britain and initially settled through penal transportation to the colony of New South Wales from 26 January 1788, a date which became Australia's national day. The population grew steadily in subsequent decades, and by the time of an 1850s gold rush, most of the continent had been explored and an additional five self-governing crown colonies established. On 1 January 1901, the six colonies federated, forming the Commonwealth of Australia. Australia has since maintained a stable liberal democratic political system that functions as a federal parliamentary constitutional monarchy, comprising six states and ten territories.Being the oldest, flattest and driest inhabited continent, with the least fertile soils, Australia has a landmass of 7,617,930 square kilometres (2,941,300 sq mi). A megadiverse country, its size gives it a wide variety of landscapes, with deserts in the centre, tropical rainforests in the north-east and mountain ranges in the south-east. Its population density, 2.8 inhabitants per square kilometre, remains among the lowest in the world. Australia generates its income from various sources including mining-related exports, telecommunications, banking, and manufacturing.Australia is a highly developed country, with the world's 14th-largest economy. It has a high-income economy, with the world's tenth-highest per capita income. It is a regional power and has the world's 13th-highest military expenditure. Australia has the world's eighth-largest immigrant population, with immigrants accounting for 29% of the population. Having the third-highest human development index and the eighth-highest ranked democracy globally, the country ranks highly in quality of life, health, education, economic freedom, civil liberties and political rights, with all its major cities faring well in global comparative livability surveys. Australia is a member of the United Nations, G20, Commonwealth of Nations, ANZUS, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), World Trade Organization, Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation, Pacific Islands Forum, and the ASEAN Plus Six mechanism.\nThe golden toad (Incilius periglenes, formerly Bufo periglenes) was a small true toad that was once abundant in a small, high-altitude region of about 4 square kilometres (1.5 sq mi) in an area north of the city of Monteverde, Costa Rica. It was endemic to elfin cloud forest. Also called the Monte Verde toad, Alajuela toad and orange toad, it is commonly considered the \"poster child\" for the amphibian decline crisis. This toad was first described in 1966 by herpetologist Jay Savage. The last sighting of a single male golden toad was on 15 May 1989, and it has since been classified as extinct by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN).\nThe Maria Asumpta was a brig that was wrecked in 1995 with the loss of three lives.\nAgust\u00edn Ross Edwards (February 5, 1844 \u2013 October 20, 1926) was a Chilean politician, diplomat, and banker. He was son of David Ross and Carmen Edwards Ossandon; both were of British ancestry. He was married to Susana Ferari.\nThe City of Brussels (French: Ville de Bruxelles [vil d\u0259 b\u0281ys\u025bl] or alternatively Bruxelles-Ville [b\u0281ys\u025bl vil]; Dutch: Stad Brussel [st\u0251d \u02c8br\u028fs\u0259l] or Brussel-Stad) is the largest municipality and historical centre of the Brussels-Capital Region, and the de jure capital of Belgium. Besides the strict centre, it also covers the immediate northern outskirts where it borders municipalities in Flanders. It is the administrative centre of the European Union, thus often dubbed, along with the region, the EU's capital city.The City of Brussels is a municipality consisting of the central historic town and certain additional areas within the greater Brussels-Capital Region, namely Haren, Laeken and Neder-Over-Heembeek to the north, and Avenue Louise/Louizalaan and the Bois de la Cambre/Ter Kamerenbos park to the south.As of 1 January 2017, the City of Brussels had a total population of 176,545. The total area is 32.61 km2 (12.59 sq mi) which gives a population density of 5,475 inhabitants per square kilometre (14,180/sq mi). As of 2007, there were approximately 50,000 registered non-Belgians in the City of Brussels. In common with all the Brussels municipalities, it is legally bilingual (French\u2013Dutch).\nBelgium, officially the Kingdom of Belgium, is a sovereign state in Western Europe. It is bordered by the Netherlands to the north, Germany to the east, Luxembourg to the southeast, France to the southwest, and the North Sea to the northwest. It covers an area of 30,688 km2 (11,849 sq mi) and has a population of more than 11.4 million. The capital and largest city is Brussels; other major cities are Antwerp, Ghent, Charleroi and Li\u00e8ge.Belgium a federal constitutional monarchy with a parliamentary system. Its institutional organization is complex and is structured on both regional and linguistic grounds. It is divided into three highly autonomous regions: Flanders in the north, Wallonia in the south, and the Brussels-Capital Region. Brussels is the smallest and most densely populated region, as well as the richest region in terms of GDP per capita.Belgium is home to two main linguistic groups or communities: the Dutch-speaking, mostly Flemish Community, which constitutes about 59 percent of the population, and the French-speaking Community, which comprises about 40 percent of all Belgians. A small German-speaking Community, numbering around one percent, exists in the East Cantons. The Brussels-Capital Region is officially bilingual (French and Dutch), although French is the dominant language. Belgium's linguistic diversity and related political conflicts are reflected in its political history and complex system of governance, made up of six different governments.Historically, Belgium was part of an area known as the Low Countries, a somewhat larger region than the current Benelux group of states that also included parts of northern France and western Germany. Its name is derived from the Latin word Belgica, after the Roman province of Gallia Belgica. From the end of the Middle Ages until the 17th century, the area of Belgium was a prosperous and cosmopolitan center of commerce and culture. Between the 16th and early 19th centuries, Belgium served as the battleground between many European powers, earning the moniker the \"Battlefield of Europe\", a reputation strengthened by both world wars. The country emerged in 1830 following the Belgian Revolution when it seceded from the Netherlands.Belgium participated in the Industrial Revolution and, during the course of the 20th century, possessed a number of colonies in Africa. The second half of the 20th century was marked by rising tensions between the Dutch-speaking and the French-speaking citizens  fueled by differences in language and culture and the unequal economic development of Flanders and Wallonia. This continuing antagonism has led to several far-reaching reforms, resulting in a transition from a unitary to a federal arrangement during the period from 1970 to 1993. Despite the reforms, tensions between the groups have remained, if not increased; there is significant separatism particularly among the Flemish; controversial language laws exist such as the municipalities with language facilities; and the formation of a coalition government took 18 months following the June 2010 federal election, a world record. Unemployment in Wallonia is more than double that of Flanders, which boomed after the war.Belgium is one of the six founding countries of the European Union and its capital, Brussels, hosts the official seats of the European Commission, the Council of the European Union, and the European Council, as well as one of two seats of the European Parliament (the other being Strasbourg). Belgium is also a founding member of the Eurozone, NATO, OECD, and WTO, and a part of the trilateral Benelux Union and the Schengen Area. Brussels hosts several of the EU's official seats as well as the headquarters of many major international organizations such as NATO.Belgium is a developed country, with an advanced high-income economy. It has very high standards of living, quality of life, healthcare, education, and is categorized as \"very high\" in the Human Development Index. It also ranks as one of the safest or most peaceful countries in the world.\nJean-Jacques Andrien (born 1 June 1944) is a Belgian film director.  Le Monde deem his film Le Grand Paysage d'Alexis Droeven (1981), to be the first great Film of a Walloon cinema  This film addresses two problems; the first is that of Belgium's region, site of a bitter conflict between Flemish and Walloon inhabitants, and the second that of a dramatic changes that have affected the agricultural world. The film was entered into the 31st Berlin International Film Festival where it won an Honourable Mention.\nEclipta astrigae is a species of beetle in the family Cerambycidae. It was described by Penaherrera-Leiva and Tavakilian in 2003.\n", "path": ["richard john sinclair laws", "Australia", "jean-jacques andrien", "Belgium", "Brussels"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the lowest point of the country location of pazflor?", "correct_answer": "Atlantic Ocean", "model_answer": " [/INST] The context does not provide information about the lowest point of the country location of Pazflor oil development. The context focuses on the discovery of oilfields in Angola, the history of Angola, its borders, population, culture, and other", "context": "The Pazflor oil development is an offshore oil development in Angola. It involves Perpetua, Hortensia and Zinia (Upper Miocene), and Acacia (Oligocene) oilfields, which were discovered between mid-2000 and early 2003.\nNos vemos papa is a 2011 Mexican drama film directed by Luca Carreras.The film is Luc\u00eda's first directorial venture. It was an official entry for the 17th International Film Festival of Kerala\nLoud Speaker is a play by American playwright John Howard Lawson. It was first produced by the New Playwrights' Theatre at the 52nd Street Theatre in New York, opening on March 2 1927. Harry Wagstaff Gribble directed, Mordecai Gorelik designed the sets, Eugene L. Berton composed its music, and Leonard Sillman choreographed its dances.\nThe Atlantic Ocean is the second largest of the world's oceans, with an area of about 106,460,000 square kilometers (41,100,000 square miles). It covers approximately 20 percent of the Earth's surface and about 29 percent of its water surface area. It separates the \"Old World\" from the \"New World\".The Atlantic Ocean occupies an elongated, S-shaped basin extending longitudinally between Europe and Africa to the east, and the Americas to the west. As one component of the interconnected global ocean, it is connected in the north to the Arctic Ocean, to the Pacific Ocean in the southwest, the Indian Ocean in the southeast, and the Southern Ocean in the south (other definitions describe the Atlantic as extending southward to Antarctica). The Equatorial Counter Current subdivides it into the North(ern) Atlantic Ocean and the South(ern) Atlantic Ocean at about 8\u00b0N.Scientific explorations of the Atlantic include the Challenger expedition, the German Meteor expedition, Columbia University's Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory and the United States Navy Hydrographic Office.\nThe Brandt mle 27/31 mortar was a regulation weapon of the French army during the Second World War. Designed by Edgar Brandt, it was a refinement of the Stokes mortar. The Brandt mortar was highly influential, being licensed built or copied by numerous countries.\nAngola ( (listen); Portuguese: [\u0250\u0303\u02c8\u0261\u0254l\u0250]), officially the Republic of Angola (Portuguese: Rep\u00fablica de Angola; Kikongo, Kimbundu and Umbundu: Repubilika ya Ngola), is a west-coast country of south-central Africa. It is the seventh-largest country in Africa, bordered by Namibia to the south, the Democratic Republic of the Congo to the north, Zambia to the east, and the Atlantic Ocean to the west. Angola has an exclave province, the province of Cabinda that borders the Republic of the Congo and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The capital and largest city of Angola is Luanda.The territory of Angola has been inhabited since the Paleolithic Era, hosting a wide variety of ethnic groups, tribes and kingdoms. The nation state of Angola originated from Portuguese colonisation, which initially began with coastal settlements and trading posts founded in the 16th century. In the 19th century, European settlers gradually began to establish themselves in the interior. The Portuguese colony that became Angola did not have its present borders until the early 20th century because of resistance by groups such as the Cuamato, the Kwanyama and the Mbunda.After a protracted anti-colonial struggle, independence was achieved in 1975 as the Marxist\u2013Leninist People's Republic of Angola, a one-party state supported by the Soviet Union and Cuba. The civil war between the ruling People's Movement for the Liberation of Angola (MPLA) and the insurgent anti-communist National Union for the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA), supported by the United States and South Africa, lasted until 2002. The sovereign state has since become a relatively stable unitary, presidential constitutional republic.Angola has vast mineral and petroleum reserves, and its economy is among the fastest-growing in the world, especially since the end of the civil war; however, the standard of living remains low for most of the population, and life expectancy in Angola is among the lowest in the world, while infant mortality is among the highest. Angola's economic growth is highly uneven, with most of the nation's wealth concentrated in a disproportionately small sector of the population.Angola is a member state of the United Nations, OPEC, African Union, the Community of Portuguese Language Countries, and the Southern African Development Community. A highly multiethnic country, Angola's 25.8 million people span tribal groups, customs, and traditions. Angolan culture reflects centuries of Portuguese rule, in the predominance of the Portuguese language and of the Catholic Church.\nChanglimithang Stadium is a multi-purpose stadium in Thimphu, Bhutan, which serves as the National Stadium. It is predominantly used for football matches and is the home of the Bhutan national football team, other national selections and number of Thimphu-based football clubs who play in the Premier, Super and Dzongkhag League. In addition to football, the stadium also regularly plays host to women's football, major archery tournaments, the national sport of Bhutan, and some volleyball matches. The stadium was initially constructed in 1974 for the coronation of the fourth Druk Gyalpo Jigme Singye Wangchuck, but was completely refurbished in 2007 in advance of the coronation of the fifth Druk Gyalpo Jigme Khesar Namgyel Wangchuck. Floodlighting was added to the football pitch in 2009 and an evergreen turf was laid in 2012, to coincide with the start of the first season of the National League.Located 2,300 meters above sea level, the stadium is one of the highest in the world. It has raised numerous controversies in footballing circles, as its significant altitude affects the absorption of oxygen in the human body, offering considerable advantage to the home teams who are more accustomed to such conditions.\n", "path": ["pazflor", "Angola", "Atlantic Ocean"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the flag of the located in the administrative terroritorial entity of the country location of citizenship of jesus blanco villar?", "correct_answer": "bars of aragon", "model_answer": " [/INST] The flag of the country where Jesus Blanco Villar is a citizen is Spain. The flag of Spain consists of three horizontal stripes: red, yellow, and red. The red stripes represent the kingdoms of Aragon and Castile,", "context": "Irondale High School is a public high school located in New Brighton, Minnesota. A part of the Mounds View Public Schools district, the high school is located in a suburban area approximately ten miles north of downtown Minneapolis and Saint Paul. Irondale made headlines in late 2011 when it introduced its Early College program, which began with the 2012-2013 school year. The program, run in conjunction with Anoka-Ramsey Community College, will allow students to graduate in four years with both a high school diploma and an associate's degree. This program prompted a visit from US Secretary of Education Arne Duncan, who praised Minnesota's efforts to further education.Irondale hosts grades 9-12, and was founded in 1967. It is one of two high schools in the Mounds View Public school district (621), the other being Mounds View High School.\nCatalonia (; Catalan: Catalunya [k\u0259t\u0259\u02c8lu\u0272\u0259]; Aranese: Catalonha [kata\u02c8lu\u0272\u0254]; Spanish: Catalu\u00f1a [kata\u02c8lu\u0272a]) is an autonomous community on the northeastern corner of Spain, designated as a nationality by its Statute of Autonomy Catalonia consists of four provinces: Barcelona, Girona, Lleida, and Tarragona. The capital and largest city is Barcelona, the second-most populated municipality in Spain and the core of the sixth most populous urban area in the European Union. It comprises most of the territory of the former Principality of Catalonia (with the remainder Roussillon now part of France's Pyr\u00e9n\u00e9es-Orientales, Occitanie). It is bordered by France (Occitanie) and Andorra to the north, the Mediterranean Sea to the east, and the Spanish autonomous communities of Aragon to the west and Valencia to the south. The official languages are Catalan, Spanish, and the Aranese dialect of Occitan.In the late 8th century, the counties of the March of Gothia and the Hispanic March were established by the Frankish kingdom as feudal vassals across and near the eastern Pyrenees as a defensive barrier against Muslim invasions. The eastern counties of these marches were united under the rule of the Frankish vassal, the count of Barcelona. In the 10th century the County of Barcelona became independent de facto. In 1137, Barcelona and the Kingdom of Aragon were united by marriage under the Crown of Aragon. The de jure end of Frankish rule was ratified by French and Aragonese monarchs in the Treaty of Corbeil in 1258. The Principality of Catalonia developed its own institutional system, such as courts (parliament), and constitutions, becoming the base for the Crown of Aragon's naval power, trade and expansionism in the Mediterranean. In the later Middle Ages, Catalan literature flourished. During the last Medieval centuries natural disasters, social turmoils and military conflicts affected the Principality. Between 1469 and 1516, the king of Aragon and the queen of Castile married and ruled their realms together, retaining all of their distinct institutions and legislation.During the Franco-Spanish War (1635\u20131659), Catalonia revolted (1640\u20131652) against a large and burdensome presence of the royal army in its territory, being briefly proclaimed a republic under French protection. Within a brief period France took full control of Catalonia, until it was largely reconquered by the Spanish army. Under the terms of the Treaty of the Pyrenees in 1659, the Spanish Crown ceded the northern parts of Catalonia, mostly the County of Roussillon, to France. During the War of the Spanish Succession (1701\u20131714), the Crown of Aragon sided against the Bourbon Philip V of Spain; following Catalan defeat on 11 September 1714, Philip V, inspired by the model of France imposed a unifying administration across Spain, enacting the Nueva Planta decrees, suppressing the main Catalan institutions and rights like in the other realms of the Crown of Aragon. This led to the eclipse of Catalan as a language of government and literature, replaced by Spanish. Along the 18th century, Catalonia experienced economic growth, reinforced in the late quarter of the century when the Castile's trade monopoly with American colonies ended.In the 19th century, Catalonia was severely affected by the Napoleonic and Carlist Wars. In the second third of the century, Catalonia experienced significant industrialisation. As wealth from the industrial expansion grew, Catalonia saw a cultural renaissance coupled with incipient nationalism while several workers movements appeared. In 1914, the four Catalan provinces formed a commonwealth, and with the return of democracy during the Second Spanish Republic (1931\u20131939), the Generalitat of Catalonia was restored as an autonomous government. After the Spanish Civil War, the Francoist dictatorship enacted repressive measures, abolishing Catalan self-government and banning the official use of the Catalan language again. After a first period of autarky, from the late 1950s through to the 1970s Catalonia saw rapid economic growth, drawing many workers from across Spain, making Barcelona one of Europe's largest industrial metropolitan areas and turning Catalonia into a major tourist destination. Since the Spanish transition to democracy (1975\u20131982), Catalonia has regained considerable autonomy in political, educational, environmental, and cultural affairs and is now one of the most economically dynamic communities of Spain. In the 2010s there has been growing support for Catalan independence.On 27 October 2017, the Catalan Parliament declared independence from Spain following a disputed referendum. The Spanish Senate voted in favour of enforcing direct rule by removing the entire Catalan government and calling a snap regional election for 21 December. On 2 November of the same year, the Spanish Supreme Court imprisoned seven former ministers of the Catalan government on charges of rebellion and misuse of public funds, while several others\u2014including then-President of Catalonia, Carles Puigdemont\u2014fled to other European countries (such as Belgium, in Puigdemont's case).\nJes\u00fas Blanco Villar (born 26 March 1963) is a Spanish former professional racing cyclist. He rode in three editions of the Tour de France, one edition of the Giro d'Italia and ten editions of the Vuelta a Espa\u00f1a.\nCatalunya R\u00e0dio (Catalan pronunciation: [k\u0259t\u0259\u02c8lu\u0272\u0259 \u02c8ra\u00f0i.u]) is Catalonia's public radio network. With headquarters in Barcelona, it is part of the Corporaci\u00f3 Catalana de Mitjans Audiovisuals (CCMA), owned by the Generalitat de Catalunya. Catalunya R\u00e0dio broadcasts exclusively in Catalan and is the major Catalan-language network today, although R\u00e0dio 4 from Radio Nacional de Espa\u00f1a (founded in 1976) was the first post-Franco Era station to broadcast in the language.Catalunya R\u00e0dio began broadcasting on 20 June 1983. Over the years, it has expanded to encompass four separate stations:Catalunya R\u00e0dio - The first station, and the one that gave the network its name. A generalist station that broadcasts 24 hours a day and is the third largest radio station in Catalonia by audience size.Catalunya M\u00fasica - Founded on 10 May 1987, Catalunya M\u00fasica concentrates on classical and contemporary music, plus specialized music programmes. It broadcasts 24 hours a day.Catalunya Informaci\u00f3 - Created on 11 September 1992, Catalunya Informaci\u00f3 was Spain's first all-news station. It broadcasts 24 hours a day.iCat fm - Launched on 23 April 2006, this a multi-media radio station closely linked to the Internet and promoting both traditional and contemporary culture.Catalunya R\u00e0dio has grown significantly since its inception, and is currently available in Catalonia, Valencia, the Balearic Islands, Northern Catalonia, La Franja, and Andorra.\nThe so-called Bars of Aragon, Royal sign of Aragon, Royal arms of Aragon, Four Bars, Red Bars or Coat of arms of the Crown of Aragon, which bear four red paletts on gold background, depicts the familiar coat of the Kings of Aragon. It differs from the flag because this latter uses fesses. It is one of the oldest coats of arms in Europe dating back to a seal of Raymond Berengar IV, Count of Barcelona and Prince of Aragon, from 1150.Today, this symbol has been adopted and/or included in their arms by several former territories related to the Crown of Aragon, like the arms of Spain, which wears it in its third quarter whereas the kings of Spain are heirs of those of Aragon; the shield of Andorra, which also shows it in its third quarter. It is also the main element of the arms of the present Spanish Autonomous Communities of Catalonia, Valencian Community and the Balearic Islands; the fourth quarter of the Spanish Autonomous Community of Aragon; of the French regions of Languedoc-Roussillon (Department of the Pyr\u00e9n\u00e9es-Orientales, whose territory regroups the old province of Roussillon and French Cerdagne); and in the Italian provinces of Reggio de Calabria, Catanzaro in Calabria and Lecce in Apulia. It figures also in numerous located municipal blazons in the territories of the Crown, either by explicit concession of the king, or because they were cities or towns of realengo (that is, directly dependent on the Crown and subject to no kind of manorialism); and others outside it, in which case the symbol is because of the presence of the king or knights of the Crown at some moment of their local history.\nLouis Fontaine (December 20, 1882 Cato, Michigan \u2013 March 2, 1960) was an American racecar driver. Fontaine competed in six early Championship Car races from 1912 to 1921 including the 1912 American Grand Prize and the 1921 Indianapolis 500.\nSpiranthes infernalis, common name Ash Meadows lady's tresses, is a rare species of orchid known from only four locations in Nevada, all close to one another. The type locale is inside Ash Meadows National Wildlife Refuge, in Nye County approximately 90 miles (140 km) WNW of Las Vegas. The site is a seasonally wet meadow.The epithet infernalis means \"of the underworld\" or \"of the nether regions,\" in reference to the extremely hot climate of the region.\nSyntomodrillia carolinae is a species of sea snail, a marine gastropod mollusk in the family Drilliidae.\n", "path": ["jesus blanco villar", "Spain", "catalonia", "bars of aragon"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the replaces of the place of birth of the country location of origin of kyo kii... main jhuth nahin bolta?", "correct_answer": "the thirteen colonies", "model_answer": " [/INST] The movie \"Kyo Kii... Main Jhuth Nahin Bolta\" is an Indian Hindi comedy film. India is the country of origin for the movie. India is located in South Asia and is the seventh largest country in the world", "context": "The United States of America (USA), commonly known as the United States (U.S. or US) or America, is a country comprising 50 states, a federal district, five major self-governing territories, and various possessions. At 3.8 million sq mi (9.8 million km2), the United States is the world's third or fourth largest country by total area and is slightly smaller than the entire continent of Europe's 3.93 million sq mi (10.2 million km2). With a population of more than 327 million people, the U.S. is the third most populous country. Most of the country is located contiguously in North America between Canada and Mexico. The extremely diverse geography, climate, and wildlife of the United States make it one of the world's 17 megadiverse countries.Paleo-Indians migrated from Siberia to the North American mainland at least 12,000 years ago. European colonization began in the 16th century. The United States emerged from the thirteen British colonies established along the East Coast. Following the French and Indian War, numerous disputes between Great Britain and the colonies led to the American Revolution, which began in 1775, and the subsequent Declaration of Independence in 1776. The war ended in 1783 with the United States becoming the first country to gain independence from a European power. The current constitution was adopted in 1788, with the first ten amendments, collectively named the Bill of Rights, being ratified in 1791 to guarantee many fundamental civil liberties. The United States embarked on a vigorous expansion across North America throughout the 19th century, acquiring new territories, displacing Native American tribes, and gradually admitting new states until it spanned the continent by 1848.During the second half of the 19th century, the Civil War led to the abolition of slavery. By the end of the century, the United States had extended into the Pacific Ocean, and its economy, driven in large part by the Industrial Revolution, began to soar. The Spanish\u2013American War and World War I confirmed the country's status as a global military power. The United States emerged from World War II as a global superpower and a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council. The end of the Cold War and the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 left the United States as the world's sole superpower.The United States is a federal republic and a representative democracy. It is a founding member of the United Nations, World Bank, International Monetary Fund, Organization of American States (OAS), and many other international organizations. The United States is a highly developed country, with the world's largest economy by nominal GDP and second-largest economy by PPP, accounting for approximately a quarter of global GDP. The U.S. economy is largely post-industrial, characterized by the dominance of services and knowledge-based activities, although the manufacturing sector remains the second-largest in the world. The United States is the world's largest importer and the second largest exporter of goods, by value. Although its population is only 4.3% of the world total, the U.S. holds 31% of the total wealth in the world, the largest share of global wealth concentrated in a single country.Despite income and wealth disparities, the United States continues to rank very high in measures of socioeconomic performance, including average wage, human development, per capita GDP, and worker productivity. The United States is the foremost military power in the world, making up a third of global military spending, and is a leading political, cultural, and scientific force internationally.\nIndia (born May 17, 1977) is the stage name of a pornographic actress, singer and rapper.She began working as an adult actress in around 1998 and has since appeared in over 200 videos. For five years she was an exclusive contract girl for the production company Video Team, and she has an exclusive sex toy line, manufactured by California Exotic Novelties.India owns the record company Black Widow Entertainment, and in 2006 she released her debut solo album Role Play. She had previously been a member of several girl groups; her first album, Hi Naturally, was released in 1994 when she was in the group Harmony Innocents. In July 2002 she was profiled on VH1's All Access hip-hop/porn special. In 2004 her vocals featured in the movie Walking Tall, starring Dwayne \"The Rock\" Johnson.\nKyo Kii... Main Jhuth Nahin Bolta (translation: Because I don't lie) is a 2001 Indian Hindi comedy film, starring Govinda, Sushmita Sen, Rambha, Anupam Kher, Satish Kaushik, Mohnish Bahl and Ashish Vidyarthi. It is directed by David Dhawan and was declared a flop.This movie is inspired by the Hollywood film Liar Liar (1997), starring Jim Carrey. The movie shares certain elements with Liar Liar, such as Govinda being a compulsive liar like Carrey's character and his son wishing that his dad would stop lying. The movie is also inspired by superhit Marathi movie Dhangad Dhinga starring Mahesh Kothare and Laxmikant Berde. Some plot is inspired from Rakesh Roshan's Kaamchor.\nNo. 40 Wing formed part of the Royal Air Force (RAF) Palestine Brigade during World War I and immediately after. It was established in October 1917 as 40th (Army) Wing, Royal Flying Corps (RFC), and become part of the RAF in April 1918, when the RFC merged with the Royal Naval Air Service. The wing played a major part in the Battle of Megiddo, the last great offensive against the Ottoman Empire, in September 1918. It was disbanded in April 1920.\nThe Thirteen Colonies, also known as the Thirteen British Colonies or the Thirteen American Colonies, were a group of colonies of Great Britain on the Atlantic coast of America founded in the 17th and 18th centuries which declared independence in 1776 and formed the United States of America. The Thirteen Colonies had very similar political, constitutional, and legal systems and were dominated by Protestant English-speakers. They were part of Britain's possessions in the New World, which also included colonies in Canada, the Caribbean, and Florida.Between 1625 and 1775, the colonial population grew from roughly 2,000 to 2.4 million, displacing American Indians. This population included people subject to a system of slavery which was legal in all of the colonies prior to the American Revolutionary War. In the 18th century, the British government operated its colonies under a policy of mercantilism, in which the central government administered its possessions for the economic benefit of the mother country. The Thirteen Colonies had a high degree of self-governance and active local elections, and they resisted London's demands for more control. The French and Indian War (1754\u201363) against France and its Indian allies led to growing tensions between Britain and the Thirteen Colonies. In the 1750s, the colonies began collaborating with one another instead of dealing directly with Britain. These inter-colonial activities cultivated a sense of shared American identity and led to calls for protection of the colonists' \"Rights as Englishmen\", especially the principle of \"no taxation without representation\". Grievances with the British government led to the American Revolution, in which the colonies collaborated in forming the Continental Congress. The colonists fought the American Revolutionary War (1775\u201383) with the aid of France and, to a significantly smaller degree, the Dutch Republic and Spain.\nDreams Die Hard  is an autobiographical book published in 1982 and re-issued in 1993 by David Harris, a prominent anti-Vietnam War activist during the 1960s.The book chronicles the experiences of three men (Harris, Allard Lowenstein, and Dennis Sweeney) amid the political and social tumult of the 1960s, as well as the aftermath of these experiences. Specifically, paranoid schizophrenia and two decades of accumulated disillusionment and homophobia eventually led a deranged Sweeney to murder Lowenstein.One-term Congressman Lowenstein, \"the world's oldest student activist,\" had, by his forties, lived decades in various political arenas. From the Mississippi Freedom Summer project in the Deep South, to the Dump Johnson campaign of 1968, Allard was passionate and well-connected in liberal circles. He was most likely bisexual before the word was current.,Harris's detailed and historical narration, written in an attempt to explain the lives of each of the characters, discusses how the three activists began their affiliations at Stanford University, and continued through the turbulent decade.Lowenstein's sexual orientation reappears throughout the book and serves as one of many connections between the three main figures: both Harris and Sweeney rejected overt passes from Lowenstein; Harris's reaction was thoughtful, empathetic, and verbal; but Sweeney's reaction was decidedly irrational and physical and ended in murder.\nSamuel Kirshbaum Knight was a suffragan bishop from 1924 until his death in 1932.Born in 1868 and educated at Trinity College, Dublin he was ordained in 1892. His first post was as a  curate at Wardleworth after which he was successively Priest-in-charge at St Paul\u2019s Barking and Vicar of St Mark\u2019s Notting Hill before being appointed a Lecturer at King's College London. In 1919 he  moved to the North East to becoming the Rural Dean for the Houghton-le-Spring area, then a Canon Residentiary at Durham Cathedral and finally in 1924 the Bishop of Jarrow.He was married to Emmeline Cicely Knight, who died on 26 November 1955, aged 83. They are buried together in St Cuthbert's Cemetery, Durham.\nHenry Lewis James (18 March 1864 \u2013 17 January 1949) was Dean of Bangor from 1934 to 1940 and an author of theological works in Welsh.\n", "path": ["kyo kii... main jhuth nahin bolta", "India", "United States of America", "the thirteen colonies"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the country location of origin of the continent of the country location of the located on terrain feature of aird uig?", "correct_answer": "Sweden", "model_answer": " [/INST] The country location of Aird Uig is Scotland. Aird Uig is a village located in the Outer Hebrides of Scotland, an island chain off the west coast of mainland Scotland. The village is situated on the C40", "context": "Political Repression in Modern America from 1870 to 1976 is a historical account of significant civil liberties violations concerning American political dissidents since 1870 \u2013 a date demarcating the close of the Civil War decade and the development of the modern American industrial state.\nSweden (Swedish: Sverige [\u02c8sv\u00e6rj\u025b] (listen)), formal name: the Kingdom of Sweden (Swedish: Konungariket Sverige ), is a Scandinavian Nordic country in Northern Europe. It borders Norway to the west and north and Finland to the east, and is connected to Denmark in the southwest by a bridge-tunnel across the \u00d6resund, a strait at the Swedish-Danish border. At 450,295 square kilometres (173,860 sq mi), Sweden is the largest country in Northern Europe, the third-largest country in the European Union and the fifth largest country in Europe by area. Sweden has a total population of 10.3 million of which 2.5 million have a foreign background. It has a low population density of 22 inhabitants per square kilometre (57/sq mi). The highest concentration is in the central and southern half of the country.Sweden is part of the geographical area of Fennoscandia. The climate is in general very mild for its northerly latitude due to significant maritime influence. In spite of the high latitude, Sweden often has warm continental summers, being located in between the North Atlantic, the Baltic Sea and the vast Eurasian Russian landmass. The general climate and environment varies significantly from the south and north due to the vast latitudal difference and much of Sweden has reliably cold and snowy winters. It also has a vast coastline with many offshore islands, many lakes, a large proportion of the country covered by forests and includes a portion of the Scandinavian Mountains.Germanic peoples have inhabited Sweden since prehistoric times, emerging into history as the Geats (Swedish G\u00f6tar) and Swedes (Svear) and constituting the sea peoples known as the Norsemen. Southern Sweden is predominantly agricultural, while the north is heavily forested.  Today,  the sovereign state of Sweden is a constitutional monarchy and parliamentary democracy, with a monarch as head of state, like its neighbour Norway. The capital city is Stockholm, which is also the most populous city in the country. Legislative power is vested in the 349-member unicameral Riksdag. Executive power is exercised by the government chaired by the prime minister. Sweden is a unitary state, currently divided into 21 counties and 290 municipalities.An independent Swedish state emerged during the early 12th century. After the Black Death in the middle of the 14th century killed about a third of the Scandinavian population, the Hanseatic League threatened Scandinavia's culture, finances and languages. This led to the forming of the Scandinavian Kalmar Union in 1397, which Sweden left in 1523. When Sweden became involved in the Thirty Years War on the Reformist side, an expansion of its territories began and eventually the Swedish Empire was formed. This became one of the great powers of Europe until the early 18th century. Swedish territories outside the Scandinavian Peninsula were gradually lost during the 18th and 19th centuries, ending with the annexation of present-day Finland by Russia in 1809. The last war in which Sweden was directly involved was in 1814, when Norway was militarily forced into personal union. Since then, Sweden has been at peace, maintaining an official policy of neutrality in foreign affairs. The union with Norway was peacefully dissolved in 1905. Sweden was formally neutral through both world wars and the Cold War, albeit Sweden has since 2009 openly moved towards cooperation with NATO. Sweden has close relations to its Nordic neighbours, including linguistically, with the Swedish language being an official language in Finland and Swedish also being mutually intelligible with Danish and Norwegian.After the end of the Cold War, Sweden joined the European Union (EU) on 1 January 1995, but declined NATO membership, as well as Eurozone (EZ) membership following a referendum. It is also a member of the United Nations, the Nordic Council, the Council of Europe, the World Trade Organization and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). Sweden maintains a Nordic social welfare system that provides universal health care and tertiary education for its citizens. It has the world's eleventh-highest per capita income and ranks highly in numerous metrics of national performance, including quality of life, health, education, protection of civil liberties, economic competitiveness, equality, prosperity and human development.\nAird Uig (Scottish Gaelic: \u00c0ird \u00d9ig) is a village on the Isle of Lewis, in the Outer Hebrides, Scotland. Aird Uig is within the parish of Uig, and is situated on the C40 minor road which joins to the B8011 at Timsgarry.Aird Uig is a village of two distinctive characters. The south end is composed of a traditional crofting community whilst the north end is a composite of army barracks and buildings many of which have been converted into homes.Aird Uig village is home to a diverse and active community. It is situated near a bay that leads north to the Gallan Head Peninsula and has extensive views of the surrounding seascape.Between 1954 and 2010, the Royal Air Force (and latterly, NATO), operated a RADAR site at Gallan Head called RAF Aird Uig. The community is now trying to open the former base to the public as an observatory, gallery and whale listening post.\nThe Outer Hebrides (),  (Scottish Gaelic: Na h-Eileanan Siar [n\u0259 \u02c8helan\u0259n \u02c8\u0283i\u0259\u027e] or Na h-Eileanan an Iar [n\u0259\u02c8helan\u0259n \u0259\u02c8\u0272i\u0259\u027e]), also known as the Western Isles, Innse Gall (\"islands of the strangers\") or the Long Isle/Long Island (Scottish Gaelic: An t-Eilean Fada), is an island chain off the west coast of mainland Scotland. The islands are geographically coextensive with Comhairle nan Eilean Siar, one of the 32 unitary council areas of Scotland. They form part of the archipelago of the Hebrides, separated from the Scottish mainland and from the Inner Hebrides by the waters of the Minch, the Little Minch, and the Sea of the Hebrides. Scottish Gaelic is the predominant spoken language, although in a few areas English speakers form a majority.Most of the islands have a bedrock formed from ancient metamorphic rocks and the climate is mild and oceanic. The 15 inhabited islands have a total population of 27,000 and there are more than 50 substantial uninhabited islands. From Barra Head to the  Butt of Lewis is roughly 210 kilometres (130 mi).There are various important prehistoric structures, many of which pre-date the first written references to the islands by Roman and Greek authors. The Western Isles became part of the Norse kingdom of the Su\u00f0reyjar, which lasted for over 400 years until sovereignty was transferred to Scotland by the Treaty of Perth in 1266. Control of the islands was then held by clan chiefs, principal of whom were the MacLeods, MacDonalds, Mackenzies and MacNeils. The Highland Clearances of the 19th century had a devastating effect on many communities and it is only in recent years that population levels have ceased to decline. Much of the land is now under local control and commercial activity is based on tourism, crofting, fishing, and weaving.Sea transport is crucial and a variety of ferry services operate between the islands and to mainland Scotland. Modern navigation systems now minimise the dangers but in the past the stormy seas have claimed many ships. Religion, music and sport are important aspects of local culture, and there are numerous designated conservation areas to protect the natural environment.\nEurope is a Swedish rock band formed in Upplands V\u00e4sby in 1979,  by vocalist Joey Tempest, guitarist John Norum, bassist Peter Olsson, and drummer Tony Reno. They got a major breakthrough in Sweden in 1982 by winning the televised competition \"Rock-SM\" (Swedish Rock Championships): it was the first time this competition was held, and Europe became a larger success than the competition itself.Since their formation, Europe has released eleven studio albums, three live albums, three compilations and twenty-four music videos.Europe rose to international fame in the 1980s with their third album, 1986's The Final Countdown, which has sold over 3 million copies in the United States and 15 million copies worldwide (including album and single). Europe have sold over 25 million records worldwide.  The band has had two top 20 albums on the Billboard 200 chart (The Final Countdown  and Out of This World) and three top 30 singles on the Billboard Hot 100 chart (\"The Final Countdown\", \"Rock the Night\" and \"Carrie\").Europe went on hiatus in 1992, reunited temporarily for a one-off performance in Stockholm on New Year's Eve 1999 and announced an official reunion in 2003. Since then the band has released six albums, Start from the Dark (2004), Secret Society (2006), Last Look at Eden (2009), Bag of Bones (2012), War of Kings (2015) and Walk the Earth (2017).Europe has achieved new attention in the US due to being featured in a GEICO Insurance cable television commercial campaign viewed for many months across the US in 2015\u201316.The band is mainly influenced by Whitesnake, Deep Purple, Rainbow, Led Zeppelin, Thin Lizzy, UFO and Michael Schenker Group.\nPterolophia colasi is a species of beetle in the family Cerambycidae. It was described by Stephan von Breuning in 1938.\nNanitamo Jonathan Ikon\u00e9 (born 2 May 1998) is a French footballer who plays as a forward for Ligue 1 side Lille.\nThe United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, commonly known as the United Kingdom (UK) or Britain, is a sovereign country located off the north-western coast of the European mainland. The United Kingdom includes the island of Great Britain, the north-eastern part of the island of Ireland, and many smaller islands. Northern Ireland is the only part of the United Kingdom that shares a land border with another sovereign state, the Republic of Ireland. Apart from this land border, the United Kingdom is surrounded by the Atlantic Ocean, with the North Sea to the east, the English Channel to the south and the Celtic Sea to the south-west, giving it the 12th-longest coastline in the world. The Irish Sea lies between Great Britain and Ireland. The United Kingdom's 242,500 square kilometres (93,600 sq mi) were home to an estimated 66.0 million inhabitants in 2017.The United Kingdom is a unitary parliamentary democracy and constitutional monarchy. The current monarch is Queen Elizabeth II, who has reigned since 1952, making her the world's longest-serving current head of state. The United Kingdom's capital and largest city is London, a global city and financial centre with an urban area population of 10.3 million. Other major cities include Birmingham, Manchester, Glasgow, Leeds and Liverpool.The United Kingdom consists of four constituent countries: England, Scotland, Wales, and Northern Ireland. Their capitals are London, Edinburgh, Cardiff, and Belfast, respectively. Apart from England, the countries have their own devolved governments, each with varying powers, but such power is delegated by the Parliament of the United Kingdom, which may enact laws unilaterally altering or abolishing devolution (England does not have any devolved power). The nearby Isle of Man, Bailiwick of Guernsey and Bailiwick of Jersey are not part of the UK, being Crown dependencies with the British Government responsible for defence and international representation. The medieval conquest and subsequent annexation of Wales by the Kingdom of England, followed by the union between England and Scotland in 1707 to form the Kingdom of Great Britain, and the union in 1801 of Great Britain with the Kingdom of Ireland created the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland. Five-sixths of Ireland seceded from the UK in 1922, leaving the present formulation of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. There are fourteen British Overseas Territories, the remnants of the British Empire which, at its height in the 1920s, encompassed almost a quarter of the world's land mass and was the largest empire in history. British influence can be observed in the language, culture and political systems of many of its former colonies.The United Kingdom is a developed country and has the world's fifth-largest economy by nominal GDP and ninth-largest economy by purchasing power parity. It has a high-income economy and has a very high Human Development Index rating, ranking 14th in the world. It was the world's first industrialised country and the world's foremost power during the 19th and early 20th centuries. The UK remains a great power, with considerable economic, cultural, military, scientific and political influence internationally. It is a recognised nuclear weapons state and is sixth in military expenditure in the world. It has been a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council since its first session in 1946. It has been a leading member state of the European Union (EU) and its predecessor, the European Economic Community (EEC), since 1973; however, a referendum in 2016 resulted in 51.9 per cent of UK voters favouring leaving the European Union, and the country's exit is being negotiated. The United Kingdom is also a member of the Commonwealth of Nations, the Council of Europe, the G7, the G20, NATO, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), Interpol and the World Trade Organization (WTO).\nFort Yates is a city in Sioux County, North Dakota in the United States. It is the tribal headquarters of the Standing Rock Sioux Tribe and county seat of Sioux County. Since 1970 the population has declined markedly from more than 1100 residents, as people have left for other locations for work. The population was 184 at the 2010 census.\n", "path": ["aird uig", "the outer hebrides", "United Kingdom", "Europe", "Sweden"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the diplomatic relation of the continent of the highest point of the country location of lake oku?", "correct_answer": "People's Republic of China", "model_answer": " [/INST] Answer: Africa is a continent with diverse ethnicities, cultures, and languages. It is the second largest and second most populous continent in the world, located mainly in the Northern and Southern Hemispheres. Africa is home to many countries", "context": "Mount Cameroon is an active volcano in Cameroon near the Gulf of Guinea. Mount Cameroon is also known as Cameroon Mountain or Fako (the name of the higher of its two peaks) or by its indigenous name Mongo ma Ndemi (\"Mountain of Greatness\"). It is the highest point in sub-Saharan western and central Africa, the fourth-most prominent peak in Africa, and the 31st-most prominent in the world.The mountain is part of the area of volcanic activity known as the Cameroon Volcanic Line, which also includes Lake Nyos, the site of a disaster in 1986. The most recent eruption occurred on February 3, 2012.\nChina (Chinese: \u4e2d\u56fd; pinyin: Zh\u014dnggu\u00f3; lit. \"Middle Kingdom\"), officially the People's Republic of China (PRC), is a country in East Asia and the world's most populous country, with a population of around 1.404 billion. Covering approximately 9,600,000 square kilometers (3,700,000 sq mi), it is the fourth largest country by total area. Governed by the Communist Party of China, the state exercises jurisdiction over 22 provinces, five autonomous regions, four direct-controlled municipalities (Beijing, Tianjin, Shanghai, and Chongqing), and the special administrative regions of Hong Kong and Macau.China emerged as one of the world's earliest civilizations, in the fertile basin of the Yellow River in the North China Plain. For millennia, China's political system was based on hereditary monarchies, or dynasties, beginning with the semi-legendary Xia dynasty in 21st century BCE. Since then, China has expanded, fractured, and re-unified numerous times. In the 3rd century BCE, the Qin reunited core China and established the first Chinese empire. The succeeding Han dynasty, which ruled from 206 BC until 220 AD, saw some of the most advanced technology at that time, including papermaking and the compass, along with agricultural and medical improvements. The invention of gunpowder and movable type in the Tang dynasty (618\u2013907) and Northern Song (960\u20131127) completed the Four Great Inventions. Tang culture spread widely in Asia, as the new Silk Route brought traders to as far as Mesopotamia and the Horn of Africa. Dynastic rule ended in 1912 with the Xinhai Revolution, when the republic replaced the Qing dynasty. China as a whole was ravaged by Japan during World War II, and the subsequent Chinese Civil War resulted in a division of territory in 1949, when the Communist Party of China established the People's Republic of China, a unitary one-party sovereign state on the majority of China, while the Kuomintang-led nationalist government retreated to the island of Taiwan. The political status of Taiwan remains disputed.Since the introduction of economic reforms in 1978, China's economy has been one of the world's fastest-growing with annual growth rates consistently above 6 percent. According to the World Bank, China's GDP grew from $150 billion in 1978 to $12.24 trillion by 2017. According to official data, China's GDP in 2018 was 90 trillion Yuan ($13.28 trillion). Since 2010, China has been the world's second-largest economy by nominal GDP and since 2014, the largest economy in the world by purchasing power parity (PPP). China is also the world's largest exporter and second-largest importer of goods. China is a recognized nuclear weapons state and has the world's largest standing army and second-largest defense budget. The PRC is a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council as it replaced the ROC in 1971, as well as an active global partner of ASEAN Plus mechanism. China is also a leading member of numerous formal and informal multilateral organizations, including the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO), WTO, APEC, BRICS, the BCIM, and the G20. China has been characterized as a potential superpower, mainly because of its massive population, economy, and military.\nLake Oku is a crater lake on the Bamenda Plateau in the Northwest Region of Cameroon. It is located at 2,227 metres (7,306 ft) on Mount Oku, and is completely surrounded by cloud forest.The lake lies in an explosion crater formed in the last phase of development of the Oku Massif, a large volcanic field with a diameter of about 100 kilometres (62 mi). Mount Oku is a stratovolcano that rises to 3,011 metres (9,879 ft). The lake is the subject of many myths among the local people.The lake is the only known habitat of the Lake Oku Clawed Frog. The surrounding Kilum-Ijim Forest is a nature reserve, set up by BirdLife International, and home to many rare species.\nAfrica is the world's second largest and second most-populous continent, being behind Asia in both categories. At about 30.3 million km2 (11.7 million square miles) including adjacent islands, it covers 6% of Earth's total surface area and 20% of its land area. With1.2 billion people as of 2016, it accounts for about 16% of the world's human population. The continent is surrounded by the Mediterranean Sea to the north, the Isthmus of Suez and the Red Sea to the northeast, the Indian Ocean to the southeast and the Atlantic Ocean to the west. The continent includes Madagascar and various archipelagos. It contains 54 fully recognised sovereign states (countries), nine territories and two de facto independent states with limited or no recognition. The majority of the continent and its countries are in the Northern Hemisphere, with a substantial portion and number of countries in the Southern Hemisphere.Africa's average population is the youngest amongst all the continents; the median age in 2012 was 19.7, when the worldwide median age was 30.4. Algeria is Africa's largest country by area, and Nigeria is its largest by population. Africa, particularly central Eastern Africa, is widely accepted as the place of origin of humans and the Hominidae clade (great apes), as evidenced by the discovery of the earliest hominids and their ancestors as well as later ones that have been dated to around 7 million years ago, including Sahelanthropus tchadensis, Australopithecus africanus, A. afarensis, Homo erectus, H. habilis and H. ergaster\u2014the earliest Homo sapiens (modern human), found in Ethiopia, date to circa 200,000 years ago. Africa straddles the equator and encompasses numerous climate areas; it is the only continent to stretch from the northern temperate to southern temperate zones.Africa hosts a large diversity of ethnicities, cultures and languages. In the late 19th century, European countries colonised almost all of Africa; most present states in Africa emerged from a process of decolonisation in the 20th century. African nations cooperate through the establishment of the African Union, which is headquartered in Addis Ababa.\nTobias Sch\u00fctzenauer (born 19 May 1997) is an Austrian footballer who plays for SK Sturm Graz.\nGare de Tours is a railway station serving the city of Tours, Indre-et-Loire department, western France. It is situated on the Paris\u2013Bordeaux railway, the Tours\u2013Saint-Nazaire railway, and the non-electrified Tours\u2013Le Mans railway. The Gare de Tours is a terminus; most TGV trains only serve the nearby Gare de Saint-Pierre-des-Corps.On 28 December 1984, the railway station was classified as monument historique.The architect of the 1898 station was Victor Laloux, with four allegorical limestone statues of cities by Jean Antoine Injalbert (Bordeaux and Toulouse) and Jean-Baptiste Hugues (Limoges and Nantes).\nSomer Sivrioglu is a Turkish Australian chef and restaurateur.Somer Sivrioglu was born on 25 May 1971 in Istanbul, where he lived for 25 years. His mother was also a chef and restaurateur, and he gained an understanding of the Turkish cuisine early in life.Sivrioglu has held a number of senior positions in the hospitality industry. He has been involved in launching high street restaurant chains, launching specialty eateries and launching and running national restaurants. He later opened his own restaurant Efendy in Sydney.Somer Sivrioglu has written weekly columns for the Turkish community newspaper Yeni Vatan. He has also hosted the TV show Somer in Mutfagi (\"Somer's Kitchen\") and the SBS Radio program Lezzete Yolculuk (Journey to Taste).AWARDS2013 Local Business Awards WINNER Best Restaurant Inner West 2012 Best in Taste Award WINNER 2011 RCNSW Awards of Excellence WINNER Specialty Restaurant 2010 RCNSW Awards of Excellence WINNER Turkish Restaurant 2010 Inner West Courier WINNER Best Restaurant in Inner West\nCameroon ( (listen); French: Cameroun), officially the Republic of Cameroon (French: R\u00e9publique du Cameroun), is a country in Central Africa. It is bordered by Nigeria to the west and north; Chad to the northeast; the Central African Republic to the east; and Equatorial Guinea, Gabon and the Republic of the Congo to the south. Cameroon's coastline lies on the Bight of Biafra, part of the Gulf of Guinea and the Atlantic Ocean. Although Cameroon is not an ECOWAS member state, it is geographically and historically in West Africa with the Southern Cameroons which now form her Northwest and Southwest Regions having a strong West African history. The country is sometimes identified as West African and other times as Central African due to its strategic position at the crossroads between West and Central Africa.Cameroon is home to over 250 native languages spoken by nearly 20 million people. The official languages of Cameroon are French and English, the languages of former colonial French Cameroons and British Cameroons. The country is often referred to as \"Africa in miniature\" for its geological and cultural diversity. Natural features include beaches, deserts, mountains, rainforests, and savannas. The highest point at almost 4,100 metres (13,500 ft) is Mount Cameroon in the Southwest Region of the country, and the largest cities in population-terms are Douala on the Wouri river, its economic capital and main seaport, Yaound\u00e9, its political capital, and Garoua. The country is well known for its native styles of music, particularly Makossa and Bikutsi, and for its successful national football team.Early inhabitants of the territory included the Sao civilisation around Lake Chad and the Baka hunter-gatherers in the southeastern rainforest. Portuguese explorers reached the coast in the 15th century and named the area Rio dos Camar\u00f5es (Shrimp River), which became Cameroon in English. Fulani soldiers founded the Adamawa Emirate in the north in the 19th century, and various ethnic groups of the west and northwest established powerful chiefdoms and fondoms. Cameroon became a German colony in 1884 known as Kamerun.After World War I, the territory was divided between France and the United Kingdom as League of Nations mandates. The Union des Populations du Cameroun (UPC) political party advocated independence, but was outlawed by France in the 1950s, leading to the Bamileke War fought between French and UPC militant forces until early 1971. In 1960, the French-administered part of Cameroon became independent as the Republic of Cameroun under President Ahmadou Ahidjo. The southern part of British Cameroons federated with it in 1961 to form the Federal Republic of Cameroon. The federation was abandoned in 1972. The country was renamed the United Republic of Cameroon in 1972 and the Republic of Cameroon in 1984. Large numbers of Cameroonians live as subsistence farmers. Since 1982 Paul Biya has been President, governing with his Cameroon People's Democratic Movement party. The country has experienced tensions coming from the English-speaking territories. Politicians in the English-speaking regions have advocated for greater decentralisation and even complete separation or independence (as in the Southern Cameroons National Council) from Cameroon. In 2017, tensions in the English-speaking territories escalated into open warfare.\nWFCT (105.5 FM) is a radio station broadcasting an Adult contemporary format. Licensed to Apalachicola, Florida, United States, the station serves the Panama City area.  The station is currently owned by Williams Communications, Inc. In October 2018, after being knocked off the air during Hurricane Michael, WFCT changed formats to adult contemporary and began offering news updates twice an hour. WFCT is voiced by actress Susan Mazel.\n", "path": ["lake oku", "Cameroon", "mount cameroon", "Africa", "People's Republic of China"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the continent of the country location of citizenship of the director of the country location of origin of set yourself free?", "correct_answer": "Europe", "model_answer": " [/INST] The director of the \"Set Yourself Free\" hoax PSA is Henry Inglis and Aaron McCann, who are from Perth, Australia.\n\nAustralia is a sovereign country located in the Oceania region of the", "context": "Belgium, officially the Kingdom of Belgium, is a sovereign state in Western Europe. It is bordered by the Netherlands to the north, Germany to the east, Luxembourg to the southeast, France to the southwest, and the North Sea to the northwest. It covers an area of 30,688 km2 (11,849 sq mi) and has a population of more than 11.4 million. The capital and largest city is Brussels; other major cities are Antwerp, Ghent, Charleroi and Li\u00e8ge.Belgium a federal constitutional monarchy with a parliamentary system. Its institutional organization is complex and is structured on both regional and linguistic grounds. It is divided into three highly autonomous regions: Flanders in the north, Wallonia in the south, and the Brussels-Capital Region. Brussels is the smallest and most densely populated region, as well as the richest region in terms of GDP per capita.Belgium is home to two main linguistic groups or communities: the Dutch-speaking, mostly Flemish Community, which constitutes about 59 percent of the population, and the French-speaking Community, which comprises about 40 percent of all Belgians. A small German-speaking Community, numbering around one percent, exists in the East Cantons. The Brussels-Capital Region is officially bilingual (French and Dutch), although French is the dominant language. Belgium's linguistic diversity and related political conflicts are reflected in its political history and complex system of governance, made up of six different governments.Historically, Belgium was part of an area known as the Low Countries, a somewhat larger region than the current Benelux group of states that also included parts of northern France and western Germany. Its name is derived from the Latin word Belgica, after the Roman province of Gallia Belgica. From the end of the Middle Ages until the 17th century, the area of Belgium was a prosperous and cosmopolitan center of commerce and culture. Between the 16th and early 19th centuries, Belgium served as the battleground between many European powers, earning the moniker the \"Battlefield of Europe\", a reputation strengthened by both world wars. The country emerged in 1830 following the Belgian Revolution when it seceded from the Netherlands.Belgium participated in the Industrial Revolution and, during the course of the 20th century, possessed a number of colonies in Africa. The second half of the 20th century was marked by rising tensions between the Dutch-speaking and the French-speaking citizens  fueled by differences in language and culture and the unequal economic development of Flanders and Wallonia. This continuing antagonism has led to several far-reaching reforms, resulting in a transition from a unitary to a federal arrangement during the period from 1970 to 1993. Despite the reforms, tensions between the groups have remained, if not increased; there is significant separatism particularly among the Flemish; controversial language laws exist such as the municipalities with language facilities; and the formation of a coalition government took 18 months following the June 2010 federal election, a world record. Unemployment in Wallonia is more than double that of Flanders, which boomed after the war.Belgium is one of the six founding countries of the European Union and its capital, Brussels, hosts the official seats of the European Commission, the Council of the European Union, and the European Council, as well as one of two seats of the European Parliament (the other being Strasbourg). Belgium is also a founding member of the Eurozone, NATO, OECD, and WTO, and a part of the trilateral Benelux Union and the Schengen Area. Brussels hosts several of the EU's official seats as well as the headquarters of many major international organizations such as NATO.Belgium is a developed country, with an advanced high-income economy. It has very high standards of living, quality of life, healthcare, education, and is categorized as \"very high\" in the Human Development Index. It also ranks as one of the safest or most peaceful countries in the world.\nSet Yourself Free is a hoax public service announcement directed by Henry Inglis and Aaron McCann, released on 29 January 2014, via the Internet. It has gone viral, and by 5 February 2014, had over 12 million views on YouTube. Its goal is to discourage truancy in schools. The ad was produced by Henry and Aaron, a filmmaking and comedy duo from Perth, Australia, with a history of making viral videos intended to shock, and the ad states that they did so on behalf of the \"Learn for Life Foundation of Western Australia\".As of June 2016 the video is currently sitting at over 20 million views of YouTube\nJean Vinatier (born 25 November 1933) is a French former rally and racing driver. He won the Tour de Corse with a Renault 8 Gordini in 1964 and the Alpine Rally with an Alpine-Renault A110 in 1968 and 1969. In the last-ever Alpine Rally in 1971, he finished second to Bernard Darniche and recorded his third consecutive penalty-free run, becoming the third driver after Ian Appleyard and Stirling Moss to achieve the much-coveted Coupe d'Or (Gold Cup).Driving the Alpine A110, Vinatier also won the French Rally Championship in 1969 and finished third that same year at the Monte Carlo Rally, behind the Porsche 911s of Bj\u00f6rn Waldeg\u00e5rd and G\u00e9rard Larrousse. In 1970, he took part in four events in the International Championship for Manufacturers, the predecessor to the World Rally Championship. He finished second in the Acropolis Rally in Greece, behind another A110 driven by Jean-Luc Th\u00e9rier, and third in the Rallye Sanremo in Italy, behind Th\u00e9rier and Harry K\u00e4llstr\u00f6m.Vinatier also competed in endurance racing. In the final Mille Miglia in 1957, he was the first driver to go past the scene of the crash that killed eleven people. In the 24 Hours of Le Mans, Vinatier competed 14 times from 1958 to 1973. He won his class with Mauro Bianchi, brother of Lucien Bianchi, in 1967. His best overall result in the event was eighth with Andr\u00e9 de Cortanze the following year. After his racing career, Vinatier has worked as a technical delegate for the F\u00e9d\u00e9ration Internationale de l'Automobile (FIA).\nAustralia, officially the Commonwealth of Australia, is a sovereign country comprising the mainland of the Australian continent, the island of Tasmania, and numerous smaller islands. It is the largest country in Oceania and the world's sixth-largest country by total area. The neighbouring countries are Papua New Guinea, Indonesia, and East Timor to the north; the Solomon Islands and Vanuatu to the north-east; and New Zealand to the south-east. The population of 25 million is highly urbanised and heavily concentrated on the eastern seaboard. Australia's capital is Canberra, and its largest city is Sydney. The country's other major metropolitan areas are Melbourne, Brisbane, Perth, and Adelaide.Indigenous Australians inhabited the continent for about 65,000 years prior to European discovery with the arrival of Dutch explorers in the early 17th century, who named it New Holland. In 1770, Australia's eastern half was claimed by Great Britain and initially settled through penal transportation to the colony of New South Wales from 26 January 1788, a date which became Australia's national day. The population grew steadily in subsequent decades, and by the time of an 1850s gold rush, most of the continent had been explored and an additional five self-governing crown colonies established. On 1 January 1901, the six colonies federated, forming the Commonwealth of Australia. Australia has since maintained a stable liberal democratic political system that functions as a federal parliamentary constitutional monarchy, comprising six states and ten territories.Being the oldest, flattest and driest inhabited continent, with the least fertile soils, Australia has a landmass of 7,617,930 square kilometres (2,941,300 sq mi). A megadiverse country, its size gives it a wide variety of landscapes, with deserts in the centre, tropical rainforests in the north-east and mountain ranges in the south-east. Its population density, 2.8 inhabitants per square kilometre, remains among the lowest in the world. Australia generates its income from various sources including mining-related exports, telecommunications, banking, and manufacturing.Australia is a highly developed country, with the world's 14th-largest economy. It has a high-income economy, with the world's tenth-highest per capita income. It is a regional power and has the world's 13th-highest military expenditure. Australia has the world's eighth-largest immigrant population, with immigrants accounting for 29% of the population. Having the third-highest human development index and the eighth-highest ranked democracy globally, the country ranks highly in quality of life, health, education, economic freedom, civil liberties and political rights, with all its major cities faring well in global comparative livability surveys. Australia is a member of the United Nations, G20, Commonwealth of Nations, ANZUS, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), World Trade Organization, Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation, Pacific Islands Forum, and the ASEAN Plus Six mechanism.\nJean-Jacques Andrien (born 1 June 1944) is a Belgian film director.  Le Monde deem his film Le Grand Paysage d'Alexis Droeven (1981), to be the first great Film of a Walloon cinema  This film addresses two problems; the first is that of Belgium's region, site of a bitter conflict between Flemish and Walloon inhabitants, and the second that of a dramatic changes that have affected the agricultural world. The film was entered into the 31st Berlin International Film Festival where it won an Honourable Mention.\nTremaine The Album (sometimes called Tremaine) is the seventh studio album by American singer Trey Songz. It was released on March 24, 2017, by Troy Taylor's Songbook label, under the distribution from Atlantic Records. The album was supported by the single: \"Nobody Else But You\", which was certified Platinum in May 2019. The album peaked at number three on the Billboard 200.\nCercanias Sevilla is a Commuter rail system operating in and around the Seville metropolitan area. Currently, it contains 5 separate lines, 251 kilometres of railway and 37 stations.\nBeatriz Pla Navarro (Madrid, 24 December 1949) better known as Beatriz Carvajal is a Spanish theatre, television and film actress.\nEurope is a Swedish rock band formed in Upplands V\u00e4sby in 1979,  by vocalist Joey Tempest, guitarist John Norum, bassist Peter Olsson, and drummer Tony Reno. They got a major breakthrough in Sweden in 1982 by winning the televised competition \"Rock-SM\" (Swedish Rock Championships): it was the first time this competition was held, and Europe became a larger success than the competition itself.Since their formation, Europe has released eleven studio albums, three live albums, three compilations and twenty-four music videos.Europe rose to international fame in the 1980s with their third album, 1986's The Final Countdown, which has sold over 3 million copies in the United States and 15 million copies worldwide (including album and single). Europe have sold over 25 million records worldwide.  The band has had two top 20 albums on the Billboard 200 chart (The Final Countdown  and Out of This World) and three top 30 singles on the Billboard Hot 100 chart (\"The Final Countdown\", \"Rock the Night\" and \"Carrie\").Europe went on hiatus in 1992, reunited temporarily for a one-off performance in Stockholm on New Year's Eve 1999 and announced an official reunion in 2003. Since then the band has released six albums, Start from the Dark (2004), Secret Society (2006), Last Look at Eden (2009), Bag of Bones (2012), War of Kings (2015) and Walk the Earth (2017).Europe has achieved new attention in the US due to being featured in a GEICO Insurance cable television commercial campaign viewed for many months across the US in 2015\u201316.The band is mainly influenced by Whitesnake, Deep Purple, Rainbow, Led Zeppelin, Thin Lizzy, UFO and Michael Schenker Group.\n", "path": ["set yourself free", "Australia", "jean-jacques andrien", "Belgium", "Europe"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the country location of citizenship of the director of the country location of mundulla?", "correct_answer": "Belgium", "model_answer": " [/INST] The director Jean-Jacques Andrien is a Belgian film director. Mundulla is a town located in South Australia. Belgium and Australia are two different countries.</s>", "context": "An uyezd (Russian: \u0443\u0435\u0301\u0437\u0434, IPA: [\u028a\u02c8jest]) was an administrative subdivision of the Grand Duchy of Moscow, the Russian Empire, and the early Russian SFSR, which was in use from the 13th century. For most of Russian history, uyezds were a secondary-level of administrative division. By sense, but not by etymology, uyezd approximately corresponds to the English term county.\nKarl Kristoffer G\u00f6bel (born 23 October 1978) is a Swedish vocalist. He has sung for both the heavy metal band Destiny and sang for Falconer between 2003 and 2005 - a position from which he was fired to make way for the returning original vocalist, Mathias Blad. He was hired by Destiny in 2001 and left sometime between 2005 and 2006, having recorded one studio album and a re-recording of the band's debut.Presently, Kristoffer has started a new band called Metal F\u00fcr Alle with Snowy Shaw and his former Destiny bandmate Mikael \u00c5berg, as well as performing in cover bands.\nAustralia, officially the Commonwealth of Australia, is a sovereign country comprising the mainland of the Australian continent, the island of Tasmania, and numerous smaller islands. It is the largest country in Oceania and the world's sixth-largest country by total area. The neighbouring countries are Papua New Guinea, Indonesia, and East Timor to the north; the Solomon Islands and Vanuatu to the north-east; and New Zealand to the south-east. The population of 25 million is highly urbanised and heavily concentrated on the eastern seaboard. Australia's capital is Canberra, and its largest city is Sydney. The country's other major metropolitan areas are Melbourne, Brisbane, Perth, and Adelaide.Indigenous Australians inhabited the continent for about 65,000 years prior to European discovery with the arrival of Dutch explorers in the early 17th century, who named it New Holland. In 1770, Australia's eastern half was claimed by Great Britain and initially settled through penal transportation to the colony of New South Wales from 26 January 1788, a date which became Australia's national day. The population grew steadily in subsequent decades, and by the time of an 1850s gold rush, most of the continent had been explored and an additional five self-governing crown colonies established. On 1 January 1901, the six colonies federated, forming the Commonwealth of Australia. Australia has since maintained a stable liberal democratic political system that functions as a federal parliamentary constitutional monarchy, comprising six states and ten territories.Being the oldest, flattest and driest inhabited continent, with the least fertile soils, Australia has a landmass of 7,617,930 square kilometres (2,941,300 sq mi). A megadiverse country, its size gives it a wide variety of landscapes, with deserts in the centre, tropical rainforests in the north-east and mountain ranges in the south-east. Its population density, 2.8 inhabitants per square kilometre, remains among the lowest in the world. Australia generates its income from various sources including mining-related exports, telecommunications, banking, and manufacturing.Australia is a highly developed country, with the world's 14th-largest economy. It has a high-income economy, with the world's tenth-highest per capita income. It is a regional power and has the world's 13th-highest military expenditure. Australia has the world's eighth-largest immigrant population, with immigrants accounting for 29% of the population. Having the third-highest human development index and the eighth-highest ranked democracy globally, the country ranks highly in quality of life, health, education, economic freedom, civil liberties and political rights, with all its major cities faring well in global comparative livability surveys. Australia is a member of the United Nations, G20, Commonwealth of Nations, ANZUS, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), World Trade Organization, Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation, Pacific Islands Forum, and the ASEAN Plus Six mechanism.\nMundulla is a town in south eastern South Australia. The town is located in the local government area of Tatiara District Council  about 278 kilometres (173 mi) south east of the state capital of Adelaide. The name of the town is derived from the Aboriginal word mantala meaning \"place of thunder\", referring to a rumbling sound made when trampling on the earth as a result of the many caves in the area. The Council enquired about the spelling in 1965 and the Postmaster General proposed to change it to Mundalla in 1972, but this was not approved by the Geographical Names Board.At the 2011 census, Mundulla and the localities of Bordertown South and Pooginagoric shared a population of 675.The Mundulla school opened in 1878. An Australian rules football club, Mundulla Football Club, compete in the Kowree Naracoorte Tatiara Football League.In 2016 Mundulla was the subject of an episode of Back Roads.\nJean-Jacques Andrien (born 1 June 1944) is a Belgian film director.  Le Monde deem his film Le Grand Paysage d'Alexis Droeven (1981), to be the first great Film of a Walloon cinema  This film addresses two problems; the first is that of Belgium's region, site of a bitter conflict between Flemish and Walloon inhabitants, and the second that of a dramatic changes that have affected the agricultural world. The film was entered into the 31st Berlin International Film Festival where it won an Honourable Mention.\nThe Instituto Brasileiro de A\u00e7\u00e3o Democr\u00e1tica (Brazilian Institute for Democratic Action) or IBAD, founded in May 1959 by Ivan Hasslocher, was one of two Brazilian conservative think tanks (the other was the IPES) established in order to prevent what was seen as the advance of communism in Brazil. It arose as a reaction to the government of Juscelino Kubitschek, regarded as populist and lenient on fighting inflation, and intensified its action in Jo\u00e3o Goulart's administration, with campaigns of anti-communist content on the radio, television and newspapers. The IBAD had its own advertising agency, the Incrementadora de Vendas Promotion, and created a political movement called the A\u00e7\u00e3o Democr\u00e1tica Popular (Popular Democratic Action or ADEP), explicitly geared towards raising money and promoting anti-communist candidates, particularly during the electoral campaign of 1962 to the Brazilian legislature.The overt involvement of IBAD and ADEP in the 1962 campaign, which included the rent for 90 days of the carioca daily A Noite and the publishing by the newspaper O Globo of the book Assalto ao Parlamento (or Storming the Parliament, published in the United States as And Not A Shot Is Fired) of the Czech writer Jan Kozak, led to the creation of a Parliamentary Commission of Inquiry (CPI) in 1963. Although the IBAD had destroyed many of its documents before they could be analyzed by the Commission, the remaining were sufficient to demonstrate that the institute was funded by foreign companies, mostly from the United States. Then, President Goulart ordered an investigation by the judiciary that would determine what should be done with the institute. Finally, on December 20, 1963, IBAD and ADEP were dissolved by court order.\nThe Adventures of Tom Thumb and Thumbelina is a 2002 direct-to-video animated film directed by Glenn Chaika. Produced by Miramax Films and Hyperion Animation, the film was distributed by Miramax Home Entertainment.\nBelgium, officially the Kingdom of Belgium, is a sovereign state in Western Europe. It is bordered by the Netherlands to the north, Germany to the east, Luxembourg to the southeast, France to the southwest, and the North Sea to the northwest. It covers an area of 30,688 km2 (11,849 sq mi) and has a population of more than 11.4 million. The capital and largest city is Brussels; other major cities are Antwerp, Ghent, Charleroi and Li\u00e8ge.Belgium a federal constitutional monarchy with a parliamentary system. Its institutional organization is complex and is structured on both regional and linguistic grounds. It is divided into three highly autonomous regions: Flanders in the north, Wallonia in the south, and the Brussels-Capital Region. Brussels is the smallest and most densely populated region, as well as the richest region in terms of GDP per capita.Belgium is home to two main linguistic groups or communities: the Dutch-speaking, mostly Flemish Community, which constitutes about 59 percent of the population, and the French-speaking Community, which comprises about 40 percent of all Belgians. A small German-speaking Community, numbering around one percent, exists in the East Cantons. The Brussels-Capital Region is officially bilingual (French and Dutch), although French is the dominant language. Belgium's linguistic diversity and related political conflicts are reflected in its political history and complex system of governance, made up of six different governments.Historically, Belgium was part of an area known as the Low Countries, a somewhat larger region than the current Benelux group of states that also included parts of northern France and western Germany. Its name is derived from the Latin word Belgica, after the Roman province of Gallia Belgica. From the end of the Middle Ages until the 17th century, the area of Belgium was a prosperous and cosmopolitan center of commerce and culture. Between the 16th and early 19th centuries, Belgium served as the battleground between many European powers, earning the moniker the \"Battlefield of Europe\", a reputation strengthened by both world wars. The country emerged in 1830 following the Belgian Revolution when it seceded from the Netherlands.Belgium participated in the Industrial Revolution and, during the course of the 20th century, possessed a number of colonies in Africa. The second half of the 20th century was marked by rising tensions between the Dutch-speaking and the French-speaking citizens  fueled by differences in language and culture and the unequal economic development of Flanders and Wallonia. This continuing antagonism has led to several far-reaching reforms, resulting in a transition from a unitary to a federal arrangement during the period from 1970 to 1993. Despite the reforms, tensions between the groups have remained, if not increased; there is significant separatism particularly among the Flemish; controversial language laws exist such as the municipalities with language facilities; and the formation of a coalition government took 18 months following the June 2010 federal election, a world record. Unemployment in Wallonia is more than double that of Flanders, which boomed after the war.Belgium is one of the six founding countries of the European Union and its capital, Brussels, hosts the official seats of the European Commission, the Council of the European Union, and the European Council, as well as one of two seats of the European Parliament (the other being Strasbourg). Belgium is also a founding member of the Eurozone, NATO, OECD, and WTO, and a part of the trilateral Benelux Union and the Schengen Area. Brussels hosts several of the EU's official seats as well as the headquarters of many major international organizations such as NATO.Belgium is a developed country, with an advanced high-income economy. It has very high standards of living, quality of life, healthcare, education, and is categorized as \"very high\" in the Human Development Index. It also ranks as one of the safest or most peaceful countries in the world.\n", "path": ["mundulla", "Australia", "jean-jacques andrien", "Belgium"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the country location of origin of the field of this occupation of the occupation of tomoaki ogami?", "correct_answer": "England", "model_answer": " [/INST] Tomoaki Ogami is a Japanese football player. The country of origin for the occupation of football player is Japan, in the case of Tomoaki Ogami.\n\nExplanation: The context provides the name of Tomoaki Og", "context": "Tomoaki Ogami (\u5927\u795e \u53cb\u660e, \u014cgami Tomoaki, born June 7, 1969) is a former Japanese football player.\nMa\u0142e Jod\u0142o [\u02c8maw\u025b \u02c8j\u0254dw\u0254] is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Kun\u00f3w, within Ostrowiec County, \u015awi\u0119tokrzyskie Voivodeship, in south-central Poland. It lies approximately 5 kilometres (3 mi) south-west of Kun\u00f3w, 13 km (8 mi) west of Ostrowiec \u015awi\u0119tokrzyski, and 43 km (27 mi) east of the regional capital Kielce.The village has a population of 173.\nAssociation football, more commonly known as football or soccer, is a team sport played with a spherical ball between two teams of eleven players. It is played by 250 million players in over 200 countries and dependencies, making it the world's most popular sport. The game is played on a rectangular field called a pitch with a goal at each end. The object of the game is to score by moving the ball beyond the goal line into the opposing goal.Association football is one of a family of football codes, which emerged from various ball games played worldwide since antiquity. The modern game traces its origins to 1863 when the Laws of the Game were originally codified in England by The Football Association.Players are not allowed to touch the ball with hands or arms while it is in play, except for the goalkeepers within the penalty area. Other players mainly use their feet to strike or pass the ball, but may also use any other part of their body except the hands and the arms. The team that scores most goals by the end of the match wins. If the score is level at the end of the game, either a draw is declared or the game goes into extra time or a penalty shootout depending on the format of the competition. Association football is governed internationally by the International Federation of Association Football (FIFA; French: F\u00e9d\u00e9ration Internationale de Football Association), which organises World Cups for both men and women every four years.\nDictyothyris  is an extinct genus of brachiopods that lived from the Middle Jurassic to the Early Cretaceous in Europe.\nFranz Xaver Hohenleiter (also known as Schwarze Veri, Schwarzen-Veere, Schwarzer Vere, Schwarze Vere or in Swabian dialect as Schwaaz Vere, Schwarz Vere or Vere; 1788 \u2013 20 July 1819) was a notorious German criminal. As a leader of a band of robbers, he was active between 1817 and 1819 in the border regions of the Kingdom of W\u00fcrttemberg, the Grand Duchy of Baden and the Principality of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen.\nPuzdrowski M\u0142yn [puz\u02c8dr\u0254fski \u02c8mw\u0268n] is a settlement in the administrative district of Gmina Sierakowice, within Kartuzy County, Pomeranian Voivodeship, in northern Poland. It lies approximately 3 kilometres (2 mi) west of Sierakowice, 23 km (14 mi) west of Kartuzy, and 51 km (32 mi) west of the regional capital Gda\u0144sk.For details of the history of the region, see History of Pomerania.\nA football player or footballer is a sport person who plays one of the different types of football. The main types of football are association football, American football, Canadian football, Australian rules football, Gaelic football, rugby league and rugby union.It has been estimated that there are 250 million association football players in the world, and many play the other forms of football.\nEngland is a country that is part of the United Kingdom. It shares land borders with Wales to the west and Scotland to the north. The Irish Sea lies west of England and the Celtic Sea to the southwest. England is separated from continental Europe by the North Sea to the east and the English Channel to the south. The country covers five-eighths of the island of Great Britain, which lies in the North Atlantic, and includes over 100 smaller islands, such as the Isles of Scilly and the Isle of Wight.The area now called England was first inhabited by modern humans during the Upper Palaeolithic period, but takes its name from the Angles, a Germanic tribe deriving its name from the Anglia peninsula, who settled during the 5th and 6th centuries. England became a unified state in the 10th century, and since the Age of Discovery, which began during the 15th century, has had a significant cultural and legal impact on the wider world. The English language, the Anglican Church, and English law \u2013 the basis for the common law legal systems of many other countries around the world \u2013 developed in England, and the country's parliamentary system of government has been widely adopted by other nations. The Industrial Revolution began in 18th-century England, transforming its society into the world's first industrialised nation.England's terrain is chiefly low hills and plains, especially in central and southern England. However, there is upland and mountainous terrain in the north (for example, the Lake District and Pennines) and in the west (for example, Dartmoor and the Shropshire Hills). The capital is London, which has the largest metropolitan area in both the United Kingdom and the European Union. England's population of over 55 million comprises 84% of the population of the United Kingdom, largely concentrated around London, the South East, and conurbations in the Midlands, the North West, the North East, and Yorkshire, which each developed as major industrial regions during the 19th century.The Kingdom of England \u2013 which after 1535 included Wales \u2013 ceased being a separate sovereign state on 1 May 1707, when the Acts of Union put into effect the terms agreed in the Treaty of Union the previous year, resulting in a political union with the Kingdom of Scotland to create the Kingdom of Great Britain. In 1801, Great Britain was united with the Kingdom of Ireland (through another Act of Union) to become the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland. In 1922 the Irish Free State seceded from the United Kingdom, leading to the latter being renamed the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.\n", "path": ["tomoaki ogami", "association football player", "association football", "England"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the territory claimed by of the country location of Linjiang?", "correct_answer": "Taiwan", "model_answer": " [/INST] Linjiang is a county-level city located in southern Jilin province, People's Republic of China. It is under the administration of Baishan. Linjiang is not a country but rather a part of the territory governed by", "context": "China (Chinese: \u4e2d\u56fd; pinyin: Zh\u014dnggu\u00f3; lit. \"Middle Kingdom\"), officially the People's Republic of China (PRC), is a country in East Asia and the world's most populous country, with a population of around 1.404 billion. Covering approximately 9,600,000 square kilometers (3,700,000 sq mi), it is the fourth largest country by total area. Governed by the Communist Party of China, the state exercises jurisdiction over 22 provinces, five autonomous regions, four direct-controlled municipalities (Beijing, Tianjin, Shanghai, and Chongqing), and the special administrative regions of Hong Kong and Macau.China emerged as one of the world's earliest civilizations, in the fertile basin of the Yellow River in the North China Plain. For millennia, China's political system was based on hereditary monarchies, or dynasties, beginning with the semi-legendary Xia dynasty in 21st century BCE. Since then, China has expanded, fractured, and re-unified numerous times. In the 3rd century BCE, the Qin reunited core China and established the first Chinese empire. The succeeding Han dynasty, which ruled from 206 BC until 220 AD, saw some of the most advanced technology at that time, including papermaking and the compass, along with agricultural and medical improvements. The invention of gunpowder and movable type in the Tang dynasty (618\u2013907) and Northern Song (960\u20131127) completed the Four Great Inventions. Tang culture spread widely in Asia, as the new Silk Route brought traders to as far as Mesopotamia and the Horn of Africa. Dynastic rule ended in 1912 with the Xinhai Revolution, when the republic replaced the Qing dynasty. China as a whole was ravaged by Japan during World War II, and the subsequent Chinese Civil War resulted in a division of territory in 1949, when the Communist Party of China established the People's Republic of China, a unitary one-party sovereign state on the majority of China, while the Kuomintang-led nationalist government retreated to the island of Taiwan. The political status of Taiwan remains disputed.Since the introduction of economic reforms in 1978, China's economy has been one of the world's fastest-growing with annual growth rates consistently above 6 percent. According to the World Bank, China's GDP grew from $150 billion in 1978 to $12.24 trillion by 2017. According to official data, China's GDP in 2018 was 90 trillion Yuan ($13.28 trillion). Since 2010, China has been the world's second-largest economy by nominal GDP and since 2014, the largest economy in the world by purchasing power parity (PPP). China is also the world's largest exporter and second-largest importer of goods. China is a recognized nuclear weapons state and has the world's largest standing army and second-largest defense budget. The PRC is a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council as it replaced the ROC in 1971, as well as an active global partner of ASEAN Plus mechanism. China is also a leading member of numerous formal and informal multilateral organizations, including the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO), WTO, APEC, BRICS, the BCIM, and the G20. China has been characterized as a potential superpower, mainly because of its massive population, economy, and military.\nAvurududa \u0d85\u0dc0\u0dd2\u0dbb\u0dd0\u0daf\u0dd4 \u0daf\u0dcf is a Sri Lankan Sinhala language film directed by Wimal Saman Jayaweera and Nimal Tennakoon, released on December 5, 1986.Cast:Malani FonsekaHenry JayasenaIranganie SerasingheSanath Goonathilaka Somi Ratnayake and Sudath GunasekaraMusic directed by renown music director Premasiri KhemadasaArt direction by Kithsiri Mevan Jayasena and Chandraguptha ThenuweraMake up by Ranjith MathagaweeraAssistant directors were Christy Shelton Fernando and Ranjith LiyanarchchigeSpecial voice by HettiarchchiAvurududa received favorable reviews and won the 1986 Presidential award for the best Screenplay.\nJani Lax (born October 26, 1977) is a Swedish professional mixed martial artist and occasional kickboxer, who competes in the Lightweight division. He has fought around the world in a number of promotions including Finnfight, K-1, M-1 Global and Shooto.\nLinjiang (simplified Chinese: \u4e34\u6c5f; traditional Chinese: \u81e8\u6c5f; pinyin: L\u00ednji\u0101ng; listed as Linkiang on old maps) is a county-level city in southern Jilin province, People's Republic of China, located to the east of Tonghua, and not far from the border with North Korea. It is a county-level city under the administration of Baishan.\nThe Special Council of Lower Canada was an appointed body which administered Lower Canada until the Union Act of 1840 created the Province of Canada. Following the Lower Canada Rebellion, on March 27, 1838, the Constitutional Act of 1791 was suspended and both the Legislative Assembly and Legislative Council were dissolved. The Act of Union united Upper and Lower Canada into a single province with a single parliament, consisting of an upper and lower house. Upon the first meeting of this parliament, the Special Council was dissolved. In November 1839, the Special Council approved proposals made by Governor Sydenham for the union of the two Canadas.There were three Special Councils:the first, consisting of 24 members, was appointed by the acting Governor General, Sir John Colborne, and served from April 2, 1838 to June 1, 1838, when its members were dismissed by the newly arrived Governor General, Lord Durham within a week of his arrival in Canada.the second, appointed by Lord Durham, existed from June 28, 1838 to November 2, 1838. This council was much smaller than the first had been, with an initial membership of five (later expanded to seven). All the members of Durham's Council were British officials who had arrived in Canada as part of his entourage.the third, appointed by Sir John Colborne, existed from November 2, 1838 to February 10, 1841. This consisted of the same members who had been appointed in April. Lord Sydenham, who assumed office as Governor General in 1839, added twelve new members in three rounds of appointments in 1839 and 1840. None of the members of Durham's second Council served on the third Council.\nTaiwan, officially the Republic of China (ROC), is a state in East Asia. Neighbouring states include the People's Republic of China (PRC) to the west, Japan to the northeast, and the Philippines to the south. The island of Taiwan has an area of 35,808 square kilometres (13,826 sq mi), with mountain ranges dominating the eastern two thirds and plains in the western third, where its highly urbanised population is concentrated. Taipei is the capital and largest metropolitan area. Other major cities include Kaohsiung, Taichung, Tainan and Taoyuan. With 23.7 million inhabitants, Taiwan is among the most densely populated states, and is the most populous state and largest economy that is not a member of the United Nations (UN).Taiwanese indigenous peoples settled the island of Taiwan around 6,000 years ago. In the 17th century, Dutch rule opened the island to mass Han immigration. After a brief rule by the Kingdom of Tungning, the island was annexed in 1683 by the Qing dynasty of China, and ceded to the Empire of Japan in 1895. Following the surrender of Japan in 1945, the Republic of China, which had overthrown and succeeded the Qing in 1911, took control of Taiwan on behalf of the World War II Allies. The resumption of the Chinese Civil War led to the loss of the mainland to the Communist Party of China and the flight of the ROC government to Taiwan in 1949. Although the ROC government continued to claim to be the legitimate representative of China, since 1950 its effective jurisdiction has been limited to Taiwan and several small islands. In the early 1960s, Taiwan entered a period of rapid economic growth and industrialization called the \"Taiwan Miracle\". In the 1980s and early 1990s, the ROC transitioned from a one-party military dictatorship to a multi-party democracy with a semi-presidential system.Taiwan's export-oriented industrial economy is the 21st-largest in the world, with major contributions from steel, machinery, electronics and chemicals manufacturing. Taiwan is a developed country, ranking 15th in GDP per capita. It is ranked highly in terms of political and civil liberties, education, health care and human development.The political status of Taiwan remains uncertain. The ROC is no longer a member of the UN, having been replaced by the PRC in 1971. Taiwan is claimed by the PRC, which refuses diplomatic relations with countries which recognise the ROC. Taiwan maintains official ties with 16 out of 193 UN member states. International organisations in which the PRC participates either refuse to grant membership to Taiwan or allow it to participate only as a non-state actor. Taiwan is a member of the World Trade Organization, Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation and Asian Development Bank under various names. Nearby countries and countries with large economies maintain unofficial ties with Taiwan through representative offices and institutions that function as de facto embassies and consulates. Domestically, the major political division is between parties favouring eventual Chinese unification and promoting a Chinese identity contrasted with those aspiring to independence and promoting Taiwanese identity, although both sides have moderated their positions to broaden their appeal.\nGreg Peach (born November 19, 1986) is a professional Canadian football defensive end who is currently a free-agent. He was most recently a member of the Winnipeg Blue Bombers. He was originally signed by the Edmonton Eskimos as a street free agent in 2009. He played college football at Eastern Washington and was the 2008 recipient of the Buck Buchanan Award. Peach has also been a member of the Hamilton Tiger-Cats and Winnipeg Blue Bombers of the Canadian Football League..\n", "path": ["Linjiang", "People's Republic of China", "Taiwan"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the official language of the country location of origin of the place of birth of edgar wasser?", "correct_answer": "English", "model_answer": " [/INST] The official language of Germany is German. Edgar Wasser is a German rapper from Munich. Therefore, German is the official language of the country of origin of Edgar Wasser's place of birth.\n\nExplanation:\nEd", "context": "Edgar Wasser (Stage name; 20th century in Chicago) is a German rapper from Munich.\nAsh Vasudevan is the Founding Managing Partner of Edge Holdings, LLC a venture foundry that focuses on founding and funding new ventures in technology, sports & entertainment sectors.Ash in his early career, worked with CommerceNet as a Vice President, Strategic Initiatives and Investment. He currently holds key positions as Founder and Managing Partner of DigikeyIH, Founding Director at reQall Inc, Co-Founder of Aspire Entertainment], Co-Founder of Smaarts, Inc., Founding Director at Omnitrol Networks, executive producer of Gigante, a documentary about Major League Baseball player Andres Torres, and as a co-founder at Seven Figures Management.Ash is the co-author of the book Alliance Enterprise: Global Strategies for Corporate Collaboration. Ash also co-authored From \"me against you\" to \"Us against Them\", International Business and its European dimensions.Ash received his Ph.D. from Fox School of Business and Management at Temple University.He was the co-founder of the contest Million Dollar Arm, along with J.B. Bernstein, which led to discovering Dinesh Patel and Rinku Singh, the first two Indian born athletes to ever play professional team sports in North America. He was portrayed by actor Aasif Mandvi in the film Million Dollar Arm, which told the story of Patel and Singh.\nThe United States of America (USA), commonly known as the United States (U.S. or US) or America, is a country comprising 50 states, a federal district, five major self-governing territories, and various possessions. At 3.8 million sq mi (9.8 million km2), the United States is the world's third or fourth largest country by total area and is slightly smaller than the entire continent of Europe's 3.93 million sq mi (10.2 million km2). With a population of more than 327 million people, the U.S. is the third most populous country. Most of the country is located contiguously in North America between Canada and Mexico. The extremely diverse geography, climate, and wildlife of the United States make it one of the world's 17 megadiverse countries.Paleo-Indians migrated from Siberia to the North American mainland at least 12,000 years ago. European colonization began in the 16th century. The United States emerged from the thirteen British colonies established along the East Coast. Following the French and Indian War, numerous disputes between Great Britain and the colonies led to the American Revolution, which began in 1775, and the subsequent Declaration of Independence in 1776. The war ended in 1783 with the United States becoming the first country to gain independence from a European power. The current constitution was adopted in 1788, with the first ten amendments, collectively named the Bill of Rights, being ratified in 1791 to guarantee many fundamental civil liberties. The United States embarked on a vigorous expansion across North America throughout the 19th century, acquiring new territories, displacing Native American tribes, and gradually admitting new states until it spanned the continent by 1848.During the second half of the 19th century, the Civil War led to the abolition of slavery. By the end of the century, the United States had extended into the Pacific Ocean, and its economy, driven in large part by the Industrial Revolution, began to soar. The Spanish\u2013American War and World War I confirmed the country's status as a global military power. The United States emerged from World War II as a global superpower and a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council. The end of the Cold War and the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 left the United States as the world's sole superpower.The United States is a federal republic and a representative democracy. It is a founding member of the United Nations, World Bank, International Monetary Fund, Organization of American States (OAS), and many other international organizations. The United States is a highly developed country, with the world's largest economy by nominal GDP and second-largest economy by PPP, accounting for approximately a quarter of global GDP. The U.S. economy is largely post-industrial, characterized by the dominance of services and knowledge-based activities, although the manufacturing sector remains the second-largest in the world. The United States is the world's largest importer and the second largest exporter of goods, by value. Although its population is only 4.3% of the world total, the U.S. holds 31% of the total wealth in the world, the largest share of global wealth concentrated in a single country.Despite income and wealth disparities, the United States continues to rank very high in measures of socioeconomic performance, including average wage, human development, per capita GDP, and worker productivity. The United States is the foremost military power in the world, making up a third of global military spending, and is a leading political, cultural, and scientific force internationally.\nThe Holden Commodore (VR) is an executive car which was produced by the Australian manufacturer Holden from 1993 to 1995. It was the third iteration of the second generation of the Australian built Holden Commodore. The VR range included the luxury variants, Holden Commodore Berlina (VR) and Holden Calais (VR) and a commercial model, the Holden Ute (VR).\nAgdistis adenensis is a moth in the family Pterophoridae. It is known from Yemen, Oman, Iran and Bahrain.\nEnglish is a West Germanic language that was first spoken in early medieval England and eventually became a global lingua franca. It is named after the Angles, one of the Germanic tribes that migrated to the area of Great Britain that later took their name, as England. Both names derive from Anglia, a peninsula in the Baltic Sea. The language is closely related to Frisian and Low Saxon, and its vocabulary has been significantly influenced by other Germanic languages, particularly Norse (a North Germanic language), and to a greater extent by Latin and French.English has developed over the course of more than 1,400 years. The earliest forms of English, a group of West Germanic (Ingvaeonic) dialects brought to Great Britain by Anglo-Saxon settlers in the 5th century, are collectively called Old English. Middle English began in the late 11th century with the Norman conquest of England; this was a period in which the language was influenced by French. Early Modern English began in the late 15th century with the introduction of the printing press to London, the printing of the King James Bible and the start of the Great Vowel Shift.Through the worldwide influence of the British Empire, and later the United States, Modern English has been spreading around the world since the 17th century. Through all types of printed and electronic media, and spurred by the emergence of the United States as a global superpower, English has become the leading language of international discourse and the lingua franca in many regions and professional contexts such as science, navigation and law.English is the largest language by number of speakers, and the third most-spoken native language in the world, after Standard Chinese and Spanish. It is the most widely learned second language and is either the official language or one of the official languages in almost 60 sovereign states. There are more people who have learned it as a second language than there are native speakers. It is estimated that there are over 2 billion speakers of English. English is the most commonly spoken language in the United Kingdom, the United States, Canada, Australia, Ireland and New Zealand, and it is widely spoken in some areas of the Caribbean, Africa and South Asia. It is a co-official language of the United Nations, the European Union and many other world and regional international organisations. It is the most widely spoken Germanic language, accounting for at least 70% of speakers of this Indo-European branch. English has a vast vocabulary, though counting how many words any language has is impossible. English speakers are called \"Anglophones\".Modern English grammar is the result of a gradual change from a typical Indo-European dependent marking pattern, with a rich inflectional morphology and relatively free word order, to a mostly analytic pattern with little inflection, a fairly fixed SVO word order and a complex syntax. Modern English relies more on auxiliary verbs and word order for the expression of complex tenses, aspect and mood, as well as passive constructions, interrogatives and some negation. The variation among the accents and dialects of English used in different countries and regions\u2014in terms of phonetics and phonology, and sometimes also vocabulary, grammar, and spelling\u2014can often be understood by speakers of different dialects, but in extreme cases can lead to confusion or even mutual unintelligibility between English speakers.\nDes Alwi Abubakar (November 17, 1927 \u2013 November 12, 2010) was an Indonesian historian, diplomat, writer and advocate of the Banda Islands. He was the adopted son of Mohammad Hatta, the first Vice President of Indonesia, whom he called \"Oom Kacamata\" (\"Uncle Eyeglasses\").\nChicago is a 2002 American musical crime comedy-drama film based on the stage-musical of the same name and the 1927 play, Chicago (play), by Maurine Dallas Watkins. It explores the themes of celebrity, scandal, and corruption in Chicago during the Jazz Age. The film stars Ren\u00e9e Zellweger, Catherine Zeta-Jones, and Richard Gere. Chicago centers on Velma Kelly (Zeta-Jones) and Roxie Hart (Zellweger), two murderesses who find themselves in jail together awaiting trial in 1920s Chicago. Velma, a vaudevillian, and Roxie, a housewife, fight for the fame that will keep them from the gallows. It marks the theatrical directional debut of Rob Marshall, who also choreographed the film. The film is adapted by screenwriter Bill Condon, with music by John Kander and lyrics by Fred Ebb, Chicago won six Academy Awards in 2003, including Best Picture. The film was critically lauded, and was the first musical to win Best Picture since Oliver! in 1968.\n", "path": ["edgar wasser", "Chicago", "United States of America", "English"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the place of death of the founded by of the religion of the country location of wor mamay district?", "correct_answer": "Medina", "model_answer": " [/INST] The founder of Islam, Prophet Muhammad, did not die in the Wor Mamay District of Afghanistan. He was born in Mecca, Saudi Arabia, and died in Medina, Saudi Arabia.\n\nExplanation: The query asks for", "context": "Derek John Harford Worlock CH (4 February 1920 \u2013 6 February 1996) was an English prelate of the Roman Catholic Church; his highest posting was as Archbishop of Liverpool.\nWor Mamay District is a district of Paktika Province, Afghanistan.\nMuhammad (Arabic: \u0645\u064f\u062d\u0645\u0651\u062f\u200e, pronounced [mu\u0127ammad];  c. 570 CE \u2013 8 June 632 CE) was an Arab political, social and religious leader and the founder of Islam. According to Islamic doctrine, he was a prophet, sent to present and confirm the monotheistic teachings preached previously by Adam, Abraham, Moses, Jesus, and other prophets. He is viewed as the final prophet of God in all the main branches of Islam, though some modern denominations diverge from this belief. Muhammad united Arabia into a single Muslim polity, with the Quran as well as his teachings and practices forming the basis of Islamic religious belief. He is referred to by many appellations, including Messenger of Allah, The Prophet Muhammad, Allah's Apostle, Last Prophet of Islam and others; there are also many variant spellings of Muhammad, such as Mohamet, Mahamad, Muhamad and many others.Born approximately 570 CE (Year of the Elephant) in the Arabian city of Mecca, Muhammad was orphaned at the age of six. He was raised under the care of his paternal grandfather Abd al-Muttalib, and upon his death, by his uncle Abu Talib. In later years he would periodically seclude himself in a mountain cave named Hira for several nights of prayer. When he was 40, Muhammad reported being visited by Gabriel in the cave, and receiving his first revelation from God. Three years later, in 610, Muhammad started preaching these revelations publicly, proclaiming that \"God is One\", that complete \"submission\" (isl\u0101m) to God is the right way of life (d\u012bn), and that he was a prophet and messenger of God, similar to the other prophets in Islam.The followers of Muhammad were initially few in number, and experienced hostility from Meccan polytheists. He sent some of his followers to Abyssinia in 615 to shield them from prosecution, before he and his followers migrated from Mecca to Medina (then known as Yathrib) in 622. This event, the Hijra, marks the beginning of the Islamic calendar, also known as the Hijri Calendar. In Medina, Muhammad united the tribes under the Constitution of Medina. In December 629, after eight years of intermittent fighting with Meccan tribes, Muhammad gathered an army of 10,000 Muslim converts and marched on the city of Mecca. The conquest went largely uncontested and Muhammad seized the city with little bloodshed. In 632, a few months after returning from the Farewell Pilgrimage, he fell ill and died. By the time of his death, most of the Arabian Peninsula had converted to Islam.The revelations (each known as Ayah, lit. \"Sign [of God]\") which Muhammad reported receiving until his death form the verses of the Quran, regarded by Muslims as the verbatim \"Word of God\" and around which the religion is based. Besides the Quran, Muhammad's teachings and practices (sunnah), found in the Hadith and sira (biography) literature, are also upheld and used as sources of Islamic law (see Sharia).\nRoma Mitchell Secondary College is a secondary school in Gepps Cross, a northern suburb of Adelaide, the capital of South Australia. It is composed of three separate campuses: Co-Education, Girls\u2019 Education and Special Education. The school was established in 2011 by combining four previous schools, Ross Smith Secondary School, Enfield High School, Gepps Cross Girls High and Gepps Cross Senior School. The school was named after Dame Roma Mitchell , the first Australian woman to become a judge, a Queen's Counsel, a chancellor of an Australian university and a governor of an Australian state. The name was selected in conjunction with student and parent communities of the closing schools and the wider community. The enrolment in 2012 was approximately 1069 students.\nIslam () is an Abrahamic, monotheistic religion teaching that there is only one God (Arabic: Allah), and that Muhammad is the messenger of God. It is the world's second-largest religion with over 1.8 billion followers or 24% of the world's population, most commonly known as Muslims. Muslims make up a majority of the population in 50 countries. Islam teaches that God is merciful, all-powerful, and unique, and has guided mankind through prophets, revealed scriptures and natural signs. The primary scriptures of Islam are the Quran, claimed to be the verbatim word of God, and the teachings and normative examples (called the sunnah, composed of accounts called hadith) of Muhammad (c. 570 \u2013 8 June 632 CE).Islamic scripture claims Islam to be the complete and universal version of a primordial faith that was revealed many times before through prophets including Adam, Abraham, Moses and Jesus and it teaches that the Quran in its original Arabic to be the unaltered and final revelation of God. Like other Abrahamic religions, Islam also teaches a final judgment with the righteous rewarded paradise and unrighteous punished in hell. Religious concepts and practices include the Five Pillars of Islam, which are obligatory acts of worship, and following Islamic law (sharia), which touches on virtually every aspect of life and society, from banking and welfare to women and the environment. The cities of Mecca, Medina and Jerusalem are home to the three holiest sites in Islam.Aside from the theological narrative, Islam is historically believed to have originated in the early 7th century CE in Mecca, and by the 8th century the Umayyad Caliphate extended from Iberia in the west to the Indus River in the east. The Islamic Golden Age refers to the period traditionally dated from the 8th century to the 13th century, during the Abbasid Caliphate, when much of the historically Muslim world was experiencing a scientific, economic and cultural flourishing.  The spread of Islam has involved both conquest and conversion to Islam by missionary activities (dawah) also conducted by traders.  Much of the expansion occurred under various Muslim states and dynasties including caliphates, such as the Ottoman Empire.Most Muslims are of one of two denominations; Sunni (75\u201390%) or Shia (10-20%). About 13% of Muslims live in Indonesia, the largest Muslim-majority country; 31% of Muslims live in South Asia, the largest population of Muslims in the world; 20% in the Middle East\u2013North Africa, where it is the dominant religion; and 15% in Sub-Saharan Africa. Sizeable Muslim communities are also found in the Americas, the Caucasus, Central Asia, China, Europe, Mainland Southeast Asia, the Philippines, and Russia. Islam is the fastest-growing major religion in the world.\nMedina, also transliterated as Mad\u012bnah, is a city in the Hejazi region of the Arabian Peninsula and administrative headquarters of the Al-Madinah Region of Saudi Arabia. At the city's heart is al-Masjid an-Nabawi ('The Prophet's Mosque'), which is the burial place of the Islamic prophet, Muhammad, and it is one of two holiest cities in Islam, the other being Mecca.Medina was Muhammad's destination of his Hijrah (migration) from Mecca, and became the capital of a rapidly increasing Muslim Empire, under Muhammad's leadership, serving as the power base of Islam, and where Muhammad's Ummah (Community), composed of both locals and immigrants from Muhammad's original home of Mecca, developed. Medina is home to three prominent mosques, namely al-Masjid an-Nabawi, Quba Mosque, and Masjid al-Qiblatayn ('The mosque of the two Qiblas'). Muslims believe that the chronologically final surahs of the Quran were revealed to Muhammad in Medina, and are called Medinan surahs in contrast to the earlier Meccan surahs.\nAndeline is an American experimental Indie (music) band that formed in Edmond, Oklahoma in 2004.Andeline first started as the creation of high school friends Ryan Ainsworth and Jason McManus.  Drew Housley was employed on the guitar and stuck with the band until his departure in late 2004.  His replacement was Andeline current, Sammy Mitchell.In 2004 they self-released an EP titled Based on a Story, which had a very limited print run and was only sold at live appearances. In 2005, Andeline signed with Independent Artists Alliance and released their second album, \"Transponder Down\" (2005), which was widely acclaimed and received attention on the multinational level. Andeline differentiated from the music scene in part by the fact that they produced all material solely by themselves.  \"Transponder Down\" was completely self-recorded by Andeline and produced by Guitarist Ryan Ainsworth and Drummer Jason McManus.  The artwork for \"Transponder Down\" was created by McManus as well.As of February 2006, Andeline had decided to separate.\nAfghanistan ( (listen); Pashto/Dari: \u0627\u0641\u063a\u0627\u0646\u0633\u062a\u0627\u0646, Pashto: Af\u0121\u0101nist\u0101n [av\u0263\u0252nis\u02c8t\u0252n, ab-], Dari: Af\u0121\u0101nest\u0101n [av\u0263\u0252nes\u02c8t\u0252n]), officially the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan, is a landlocked country located in South-Central Asia. Afghanistan is bordered by Pakistan in the south and east; Iran in the west; Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, and Tajikistan in the north; and in the far northeast, China. Much of its 652,000 square kilometers (252,000 sq mi) is covered by the Hindu Kush mountain range. Kabul is the capital and largest city.Human habitation in Afghanistan dates back to the Middle Paleolithic Era, and the country's strategic location along the Silk Road connected it to the cultures of the Middle East and other parts of Asia. The land has historically been home to various peoples and has witnessed numerous military campaigns, including those by Alexander the Great, Mauryas, Muslim Arabs, Mongols, British, Soviets, and since 2001 by the United States with NATO-allied countries. It has been called, \"unconquerable\" and nicknamed the, \"graveyard of empires,\" though it has been occupied during several different periods of its history. The land also served as the source from which the Kushans, Hephthalites, Samanids, Saffarids, Ghaznavids, Ghorids, Khaljis, Mughals, Hotaks, Durranis, and others have risen to form major empires.The political history of the modern state of Afghanistan began with the Hotak and Durrani dynasties in the 18th century. In the late 19th century, Afghanistan became a buffer state in the \"Great Game\" between British India and the Russian Empire. Its border with British India, the Durand Line, was formed in 1893 but it is not recognized by the Afghan government and it has led to strained relations with Pakistan since the latter's independence in 1947. Following the Third Anglo-Afghan War in 1919 the country was free of foreign influence, eventually becoming a monarchy under King Amanullah, until almost 50 years later when Zahir Shah was overthrown and a republic was established. In 1978, after a second coup Afghanistan first became a socialist state and then a Soviet Union protectorate. This evoked the Soviet\u2013Afghan War in the 1980s against mujahideen rebels. By 1996 most of Afghanistan was captured by the Islamic fundamentalist group the Taliban, who ruled most of the country as a totalitarian regime for over five years. The Taliban were forcibly removed by the NATO-led coalition, and a new democratically-elected government political structure was formed, but they still control a significant portion of the country.Afghanistan is a unitary presidential Islamic republic with a population of 31 million, mostly composed of ethnic Pashtuns, Tajiks, Hazaras and Uzbeks. It is a member of the United Nations, the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation, the Group of 77, the Economic Cooperation Organization, and the Non-Aligned Movement. Afghanistan's economy is the world's 108th largest, with a GDP of $64.08 billion; the country fares much worse in terms of per-capita GDP (PPP), ranking 167th out of 186 countries in a 2016 report from the International Monetary Fund.\nKamal Kenawi Ali Moustafa (born 6 June 1956) is an Egyptian former swimmer. He competed in three events at the 1972 Summer Olympics.\n", "path": ["wor mamay district", "Afghanistan", "Islam", "Muhammad", "Medina"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the place of birth of the country location of the employer of rabindranath datta?", "correct_answer": "United States of America", "model_answer": " [/INST] The country of birth of the place where Rabindranath Datta worked is India. Rabindranath Datta was born in Calcutta, India, which is now known as Kolkata. The University of Calcutta, where", "context": "Sherry Coutu CBE (born 1964) is a serial entrepreneur, former CEO, angel investor and non-executive director based in Cambridge, UK and originally from Canada.\nThe United States of America (USA), commonly known as the United States (U.S. or US) or America, is a country comprising 50 states, a federal district, five major self-governing territories, and various possessions. At 3.8 million sq mi (9.8 million km2), the United States is the world's third or fourth largest country by total area and is slightly smaller than the entire continent of Europe's 3.93 million sq mi (10.2 million km2). With a population of more than 327 million people, the U.S. is the third most populous country. Most of the country is located contiguously in North America between Canada and Mexico. The extremely diverse geography, climate, and wildlife of the United States make it one of the world's 17 megadiverse countries.Paleo-Indians migrated from Siberia to the North American mainland at least 12,000 years ago. European colonization began in the 16th century. The United States emerged from the thirteen British colonies established along the East Coast. Following the French and Indian War, numerous disputes between Great Britain and the colonies led to the American Revolution, which began in 1775, and the subsequent Declaration of Independence in 1776. The war ended in 1783 with the United States becoming the first country to gain independence from a European power. The current constitution was adopted in 1788, with the first ten amendments, collectively named the Bill of Rights, being ratified in 1791 to guarantee many fundamental civil liberties. The United States embarked on a vigorous expansion across North America throughout the 19th century, acquiring new territories, displacing Native American tribes, and gradually admitting new states until it spanned the continent by 1848.During the second half of the 19th century, the Civil War led to the abolition of slavery. By the end of the century, the United States had extended into the Pacific Ocean, and its economy, driven in large part by the Industrial Revolution, began to soar. The Spanish\u2013American War and World War I confirmed the country's status as a global military power. The United States emerged from World War II as a global superpower and a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council. The end of the Cold War and the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 left the United States as the world's sole superpower.The United States is a federal republic and a representative democracy. It is a founding member of the United Nations, World Bank, International Monetary Fund, Organization of American States (OAS), and many other international organizations. The United States is a highly developed country, with the world's largest economy by nominal GDP and second-largest economy by PPP, accounting for approximately a quarter of global GDP. The U.S. economy is largely post-industrial, characterized by the dominance of services and knowledge-based activities, although the manufacturing sector remains the second-largest in the world. The United States is the world's largest importer and the second largest exporter of goods, by value. Although its population is only 4.3% of the world total, the U.S. holds 31% of the total wealth in the world, the largest share of global wealth concentrated in a single country.Despite income and wealth disparities, the United States continues to rank very high in measures of socioeconomic performance, including average wage, human development, per capita GDP, and worker productivity. The United States is the foremost military power in the world, making up a third of global military spending, and is a leading political, cultural, and scientific force internationally.\nRabindranath Datta (also known as Roby Datta) was an Indian Poet and educator. He mostly wrote in English. He was born in a renowned Bengali Maulika Kayastha family on 1 October 1883 in Sankar Ghosh Lane, Calcutta. His father was Gyanendra Nath Dutt a member of the Hatkhola Dutt family.He studied in Oxford University. He obtained BA (Tripos, 1906) and MA (1910) degrees. He was called to the Bar (Gray's Inn), 27 January 1908 and he enrolled in the Calcutta High Court in 1909. However, he did not practice law. He taught English and Comparative Philology at Calcutta University till his death in 1917. He was a very popular teacher.He married an accomplished English woman Emily G. Atkinson in 1913. Roby Datta with his wife Emily lived in his ancestral house on Kashinath Dutt Road, Baranagore (a suburb of Calcutta (Kolkata), INDIA.In 1909, he wrote \"Echoes from East and West\"\nLinzer Stadion is a multi-purpose stadium, in Linz, Austria. Originally built in 1952, the stadium was last modified in 2012 and now has a capacity of 21,005. The 2012 modifications included the installation of rail seats for safe standing.The stadium was opened on 28 July 1952, on the grounds of the former Froschberg-Brickworks. The stadium is also known as \"Auf der Gugl\", the name of the hill on which it is situated.It is currently used mostly for football matches and hosts most matches of FC Blau-Wei\u00df Linz and top matches of LASK Linz.\nThe University of Calcutta (informally known as Calcutta University or CU) is a collegiate public state university located in Kolkata (formerly Calcutta), West Bengal, India established on 24 January 1857. It was the first institution in Asia to be established as a multidisciplinary and secular Western-style university.Within India it is recognized as a \"Five-Star University\" And Accredited \"A\" Grade by National Assessment and Accreditation Council and declared as a \"University With Potential For Excellence\" & a \"Centre with Potential for Excellence In Particular Area\"  by the University Grants Commission.Its alumni and faculty include several heads of state and government, and four Nobel laureates. The university has the highest number of students who have cleared the doctoral entrance eligibility exam in Natural Science & Arts conducted by Government of India's National Eligibility Test to become eligible to pursue research with a full scholarship awarded by the Government of India.\nNot to be confused with Jacob Joseph, former chief rabbi of New York City.Yaakov Yosef Herman (1880\u20131967) was an Orthodox Jewish pioneer in the United States in the early 20th century. A native of Slutsk, Russia, he immigrated with his parents and younger sister to New York City at the age of 8 and was left on his own five years later after his family returned to Russia. Following his marriage, Herman became known for feeding and lodging dozens of people in his home, including visiting European rabbis seeking kosher meals. He displayed a staunch commitment to mitzvah observance at a time that many abandoned their faith, and urged promising young Jewish men to pursue advanced Torah study in the great yeshivas of Europe, including his son-in-law, Rabbi Chaim Pinchas Scheinberg (1910\u20132012). For his promulgation of Torah values to his co-religionists, Herman was called the \"Chofetz Chaim of America\" by Rabbi Boruch Ber Leibowitz, the Kaminetz rosh yeshiva, who lived with the Hermans for two years while he was fundraising in the United States. Herman's youngest daughter, Ruchoma Shain (1914\u20132013), immortalized his exploits in All For The Boss: The life and impact of R' Yaakov Yosef Herman, a Torah pioneer in America: An affectionate family chronicle, first published by Feldheim in 1984.\nIndia (born May 17, 1977) is the stage name of a pornographic actress, singer and rapper.She began working as an adult actress in around 1998 and has since appeared in over 200 videos. For five years she was an exclusive contract girl for the production company Video Team, and she has an exclusive sex toy line, manufactured by California Exotic Novelties.India owns the record company Black Widow Entertainment, and in 2006 she released her debut solo album Role Play. She had previously been a member of several girl groups; her first album, Hi Naturally, was released in 1994 when she was in the group Harmony Innocents. In July 2002 she was profiled on VH1's All Access hip-hop/porn special. In 2004 her vocals featured in the movie Walking Tall, starring Dwayne \"The Rock\" Johnson.\nDelevea bertrandi is a species of myxophagan beetles in the genus Delevea.\n", "path": ["rabindranath datta", "University of Calcutta", "India", "United States of America"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the place of birth of the country location of citizenship of dattatraya damodar dabke?", "correct_answer": "United States of America", "model_answer": " [/INST] Dattatraya Damodar Dabke was born in India.\n\nExplanation: Dattatraya Damodar Dabke was an actor in the first ever Indian full length silent film Raja Harishch", "context": "Marco Bertolotto (born 8 September 1959 in Quiliano) is an Italian doctor and politician, formerly president of the Province of Savona.A graduate in medicine and surgery, Bertolotto pursued a number of specializations in medicine, surgery, and sanitary management prior to beginning his political career. He served as director of the pain therapy and palliative care unit at Santa Corona hospital in Pietra Ligure, before being elected to the first of two terms as mayor of Toirano in 1995. During his second term of office he generated a lively council debate over the construction of a waste incinerator on municipal land. He also engineered a twinning agreement, inaugurated in October 2003, with the Christian community of Rumbek in South Sudan.Bertolotto was in 2004 elected President of Savona province in a runoff on 12 and 13 June. He represented the centre-left Ulivo coalition and attracted 50.6% of the vote. In 2007 he lost the support of two of the provincial councillors representing the Italian Democratic Socialists, and in June 2008 he announced that, on failing to be selected as Democratic Party candidate for the provincial elections due in 2009, he was resigning his party membership.On 14 November 2008, following the resignation of key councillors from the governing coalition, the Savona provincial administration was formally dissolved and Bertolotto left his post. He was succeeded by the provincial commissioner Mario Spanu, who held office until an extraordinary election in 2009 installed Angelo Vaccarezza to the provincial presidency.\nWashington is a neighborhood of the city of Maysville located near the Ohio River in Mason County in the U.S. state of Kentucky. It is one of the earliest settlements in Kentucky and also one of the earliest American settlements west of the Appalachian Mountains. It played a significant role in the lead-up to the Civil War, producing two civil war generals (one Union and one Confederate) and an escaped slave whose legal case established Canada as a safe haven for escaping slaves. It also provided the site where Harriet Beecher Stowe witnessed a slave auction.  It has since been annexed by Maysville, and is sometimes now referred to as Old Washington. The community is in Area 606 served by the 759 exchange.\nThe United States of America (USA), commonly known as the United States (U.S. or US) or America, is a country comprising 50 states, a federal district, five major self-governing territories, and various possessions. At 3.8 million sq mi (9.8 million km2), the United States is the world's third or fourth largest country by total area and is slightly smaller than the entire continent of Europe's 3.93 million sq mi (10.2 million km2). With a population of more than 327 million people, the U.S. is the third most populous country. Most of the country is located contiguously in North America between Canada and Mexico. The extremely diverse geography, climate, and wildlife of the United States make it one of the world's 17 megadiverse countries.Paleo-Indians migrated from Siberia to the North American mainland at least 12,000 years ago. European colonization began in the 16th century. The United States emerged from the thirteen British colonies established along the East Coast. Following the French and Indian War, numerous disputes between Great Britain and the colonies led to the American Revolution, which began in 1775, and the subsequent Declaration of Independence in 1776. The war ended in 1783 with the United States becoming the first country to gain independence from a European power. The current constitution was adopted in 1788, with the first ten amendments, collectively named the Bill of Rights, being ratified in 1791 to guarantee many fundamental civil liberties. The United States embarked on a vigorous expansion across North America throughout the 19th century, acquiring new territories, displacing Native American tribes, and gradually admitting new states until it spanned the continent by 1848.During the second half of the 19th century, the Civil War led to the abolition of slavery. By the end of the century, the United States had extended into the Pacific Ocean, and its economy, driven in large part by the Industrial Revolution, began to soar. The Spanish\u2013American War and World War I confirmed the country's status as a global military power. The United States emerged from World War II as a global superpower and a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council. The end of the Cold War and the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 left the United States as the world's sole superpower.The United States is a federal republic and a representative democracy. It is a founding member of the United Nations, World Bank, International Monetary Fund, Organization of American States (OAS), and many other international organizations. The United States is a highly developed country, with the world's largest economy by nominal GDP and second-largest economy by PPP, accounting for approximately a quarter of global GDP. The U.S. economy is largely post-industrial, characterized by the dominance of services and knowledge-based activities, although the manufacturing sector remains the second-largest in the world. The United States is the world's largest importer and the second largest exporter of goods, by value. Although its population is only 4.3% of the world total, the U.S. holds 31% of the total wealth in the world, the largest share of global wealth concentrated in a single country.Despite income and wealth disparities, the United States continues to rank very high in measures of socioeconomic performance, including average wage, human development, per capita GDP, and worker productivity. The United States is the foremost military power in the world, making up a third of global military spending, and is a leading political, cultural, and scientific force internationally.\nD. D. Dabke or Dattatraya Damodar Dabke was an actor in the first ever Indian full length silent film Raja Harishchandra, directed by Dadasaheb Phalke in 1913. He co-starred with P G Sane. He acted in three more movies and later became a cinematographer, as well as a director. He directed the 1924 remake of Raja Harishchandra.\nThe Oregon State Leather Contest is the largest leather title contest in Oregon. Starting in 1997 the contest has celebrated members of the BDSM and Leather community and beginning in 2015 the Pup community. In 2019 a Mx title was added and the Puppy title was changed to Oregon State Pet. Blackout Leather Productions has run the event which draws contestants from all over Oregon and SW Washington. Judges for the contest include local community leaders, former title holders, and international title holders.Several winners of Oregon titles have gone on to win international titles such as the International Mister Bootblack title  and American Leatherwoman. Title holders have gone on to compete at International Ms. Leather and Bootblack, International Mr. Leather and Bootblack, and International Puppy and Handler.\nCriorhina caudata is a species of syrphid fly in the family Syrphidae.\nIndia (born May 17, 1977) is the stage name of a pornographic actress, singer and rapper.She began working as an adult actress in around 1998 and has since appeared in over 200 videos. For five years she was an exclusive contract girl for the production company Video Team, and she has an exclusive sex toy line, manufactured by California Exotic Novelties.India owns the record company Black Widow Entertainment, and in 2006 she released her debut solo album Role Play. She had previously been a member of several girl groups; her first album, Hi Naturally, was released in 1994 when she was in the group Harmony Innocents. In July 2002 she was profiled on VH1's All Access hip-hop/porn special. In 2004 her vocals featured in the movie Walking Tall, starring Dwayne \"The Rock\" Johnson.\n", "path": ["dattatraya damodar dabke", "India", "United States of America"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the diplomatic relation of the continent of the country location of nkolabona?", "correct_answer": "People's Republic of China", "model_answer": " [/INST] The country location of Nkolabona is Gabon, which is a sovereign state in Central Africa. Gabon has established diplomatic relations with numerous countries and organizations around the world. It is a member of the United Nations (UN), the", "context": "China (Chinese: \u4e2d\u56fd; pinyin: Zh\u014dnggu\u00f3; lit. \"Middle Kingdom\"), officially the People's Republic of China (PRC), is a country in East Asia and the world's most populous country, with a population of around 1.404 billion. Covering approximately 9,600,000 square kilometers (3,700,000 sq mi), it is the fourth largest country by total area. Governed by the Communist Party of China, the state exercises jurisdiction over 22 provinces, five autonomous regions, four direct-controlled municipalities (Beijing, Tianjin, Shanghai, and Chongqing), and the special administrative regions of Hong Kong and Macau.China emerged as one of the world's earliest civilizations, in the fertile basin of the Yellow River in the North China Plain. For millennia, China's political system was based on hereditary monarchies, or dynasties, beginning with the semi-legendary Xia dynasty in 21st century BCE. Since then, China has expanded, fractured, and re-unified numerous times. In the 3rd century BCE, the Qin reunited core China and established the first Chinese empire. The succeeding Han dynasty, which ruled from 206 BC until 220 AD, saw some of the most advanced technology at that time, including papermaking and the compass, along with agricultural and medical improvements. The invention of gunpowder and movable type in the Tang dynasty (618\u2013907) and Northern Song (960\u20131127) completed the Four Great Inventions. Tang culture spread widely in Asia, as the new Silk Route brought traders to as far as Mesopotamia and the Horn of Africa. Dynastic rule ended in 1912 with the Xinhai Revolution, when the republic replaced the Qing dynasty. China as a whole was ravaged by Japan during World War II, and the subsequent Chinese Civil War resulted in a division of territory in 1949, when the Communist Party of China established the People's Republic of China, a unitary one-party sovereign state on the majority of China, while the Kuomintang-led nationalist government retreated to the island of Taiwan. The political status of Taiwan remains disputed.Since the introduction of economic reforms in 1978, China's economy has been one of the world's fastest-growing with annual growth rates consistently above 6 percent. According to the World Bank, China's GDP grew from $150 billion in 1978 to $12.24 trillion by 2017. According to official data, China's GDP in 2018 was 90 trillion Yuan ($13.28 trillion). Since 2010, China has been the world's second-largest economy by nominal GDP and since 2014, the largest economy in the world by purchasing power parity (PPP). China is also the world's largest exporter and second-largest importer of goods. China is a recognized nuclear weapons state and has the world's largest standing army and second-largest defense budget. The PRC is a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council as it replaced the ROC in 1971, as well as an active global partner of ASEAN Plus mechanism. China is also a leading member of numerous formal and informal multilateral organizations, including the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO), WTO, APEC, BRICS, the BCIM, and the G20. China has been characterized as a potential superpower, mainly because of its massive population, economy, and military.\nNils \u00d8rvik (3 January 1918 \u2013 10 February 2005) was a Norwegian historian, born in Sk\u00e5t\u00f8y. He was appointed professor of international politics at the Queen's University in Kingston, Ontario in 1973.\nGabon (; French pronunciation: \u200b[\u0261ab\u0254\u0303]), officially the Gabonese Republic (French: R\u00e9publique gabonaise), is a country  on the west coast of Central Africa. Located on the equator, Gabon is bordered by Equatorial Guinea to the northwest, Cameroon to the north, the Republic of the Congo on the east and south, and the Gulf of Guinea to the west. It has an area of nearly 270,000 square kilometres (100,000 sq mi) and its population is estimated at 2 million people. Its capital and largest city is Libreville.Since its independence from France in 1960, the sovereign state of Gabon has had three presidents. In the early 1990s, Gabon introduced a multi-party system and a new democratic constitution that allowed for a more transparent electoral process and reformed many governmental institutions.Abundant petroleum and foreign private investment have helped make Gabon one of the most prosperous countries in Sub-Saharan Africa, with the 7th highest HDI and the fourth highest GDP per capita (PPP) (after Mauritius, Equatorial Guinea and Seychelles) in the region. GDP grew by more than 6% per year from 2010 to 2012. However, because of inequality in income distribution, a significant proportion of the population remains poor.\nDelhi Ganesh is an Indian film and television actor who mostly acts in supporting roles Tamil cinema and television. He has acted in more than 600 films from 1976 to present. Before films, he was a member of the Delhi-based drama troupe, Dakshina Bharata Nataka Sabha. Ganesh served in the Indian Air Force from 1964 to 1974 before quitting in favour of films. He was given the stage name Delhi Ganesh by K. Balachander.\nJames Earnest Vivieaere (1947 \u2013 3 June 2011), a New Zealand artist of Cook Island Maori heritage, was born in Waipawa, Hawke\u2019s Bay, New Zealand. He was a well-respected and significant multimedia and installation artist, freelance curator and a passionate advocate for contemporary Pacific art.\nAfrica is the world's second largest and second most-populous continent, being behind Asia in both categories. At about 30.3 million km2 (11.7 million square miles) including adjacent islands, it covers 6% of Earth's total surface area and 20% of its land area. With1.2 billion people as of 2016, it accounts for about 16% of the world's human population. The continent is surrounded by the Mediterranean Sea to the north, the Isthmus of Suez and the Red Sea to the northeast, the Indian Ocean to the southeast and the Atlantic Ocean to the west. The continent includes Madagascar and various archipelagos. It contains 54 fully recognised sovereign states (countries), nine territories and two de facto independent states with limited or no recognition. The majority of the continent and its countries are in the Northern Hemisphere, with a substantial portion and number of countries in the Southern Hemisphere.Africa's average population is the youngest amongst all the continents; the median age in 2012 was 19.7, when the worldwide median age was 30.4. Algeria is Africa's largest country by area, and Nigeria is its largest by population. Africa, particularly central Eastern Africa, is widely accepted as the place of origin of humans and the Hominidae clade (great apes), as evidenced by the discovery of the earliest hominids and their ancestors as well as later ones that have been dated to around 7 million years ago, including Sahelanthropus tchadensis, Australopithecus africanus, A. afarensis, Homo erectus, H. habilis and H. ergaster\u2014the earliest Homo sapiens (modern human), found in Ethiopia, date to circa 200,000 years ago. Africa straddles the equator and encompasses numerous climate areas; it is the only continent to stretch from the northern temperate to southern temperate zones.Africa hosts a large diversity of ethnicities, cultures and languages. In the late 19th century, European countries colonised almost all of Africa; most present states in Africa emerged from a process of decolonisation in the 20th century. African nations cooperate through the establishment of the African Union, which is headquartered in Addis Ababa.\nThe Iraq women's national football team is the female representative football team for Iraq.The team played its first international match in 2010. Their first participation in a major tournament will be the 2018 AFC Women's Asian Cup qualification.\nNkolabona is a town located in Woleu-Ntem province, Gabon.\n", "path": ["nkolabona", "Gabon", "Africa", "People's Republic of China"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the located on terrain feature of the lowest point of the country location of tilaran?", "correct_answer": "Caribbean", "model_answer": " [/INST] The terrain feature of the lowest point in the area of Tilar\u00e1n is not specifically mentioned in the context provided. However, I can share that the Caribbean Sea, with its deepest point being the Cayman Trough between the Cayman", "context": "The Caribbean Sea (Spanish: Mar Caribe; French: Mer des Cara\u00efbes; Dutch: Cara\u00efbische Zee) is a American Mediterranean Sea of the Atlantic Ocean in the tropics of the Western Hemisphere. It is bounded by Mexico and Central America to the west and south west, to the north by the Greater Antilles starting with Cuba, to the east by the Lesser Antilles, and to the south by the north coast of South America.The entire area of the Caribbean Sea, the numerous islands of the West Indies, and adjacent coasts, are collectively known as the Caribbean. The Caribbean Sea is one of the largest seas and has an area of about 2,754,000 km2 (1,063,000 sq mi). The sea's deepest point is the Cayman Trough, between the Cayman Islands and Jamaica, at 7,686 m (25,217 ft) below sea level. The Caribbean coastline has many gulfs and bays: the Gulf of Gon\u00e2ve, Gulf of Venezuela, Gulf of Dari\u00e9n, Golfo de los Mosquitos, Gulf of Paria and Gulf of Honduras.The Caribbean Sea has the world's second biggest barrier reef, the Mesoamerican Barrier Reef. It runs 1,000 km (620 mi) along the coasts of Mexico, Belize, Guatemala, and Honduras.\nThe Swedish company Wasabr\u00f6d is the largest producer in the world of Scandinavian style crisp bread (Swedish: kn\u00e4ckebr\u00f6d, Finnish: n\u00e4kkileip\u00e4, Norwegian: knekkebr\u00f8d, Danish: kn\u00e6kbr\u00f8d, Icelandic: hr\u00f6kkbrau\u00f0). The Wasabr\u00f6d company has been in business since 1919, opening its first bakery in the city of Skellefte\u00e5. Since 1983 it has been under foreign ownership, first by the Swiss pharmaceutical corporation Sandoz (later merged with Ciba Geigy to become Novartis), and from 1999 by the Italian food producer Barilla Alimentare S.p.A..The first bakery in Skellefte\u00e5, founded by Karl Edvard Lundstr\u00f6m, was supplemented by another, completely mechanized, one in Filipstad in 1931, which has since become the main seat of the corporation. It later acquired several other Swedish bakeries. It started exporting bread in the 1940s, with the first foreign subsidiary founded in Denmark in 1965 and the first foreign bakery built in Celle in Germany in 1967. In the early 21st century Wasabr\u00f6d sells about 80% of its production outside Sweden.K. E. Lundstr\u00f6m, the founder of the company, had run his own bakery in Skellefte\u00e5 since 1915 (Firma K. E. Lundstr\u00f6m), with the corporation founded in 1919, AB Skellefte\u00e5 spisbr\u00f6dsfabrik, taking its original name from the hometown. The Filipstad subsidiary which developed into the main part of the company took the name AB Wasa spisbr\u00f6dsfabrik in 1934, which was shortened to AB Wasabr\u00f6d in 1964. The brand Wasa was originally that of one particular product, Vasakn\u00e4cke, featuring an image of King Gustavus Vasa. The company has used both a royal crown and the peculiar heraldic charge, the garb (Swedish: vase), which gave name to the Vasa dynasty, in its marketing. (Using the letter W instead of V is an archaism in Swedish; it is not uncommon in marketing, but does not affect the pronunciation.)Wasabr\u00f6d produces a wide variety of crisp breads. The original crisp bread is made of rye, but their various products include sesame, wheat, and other grains. Like matzo, Wasa is noted for its shelf longevity.The company has the status of a Purveyor to the Royal Court of Sweden.\nStephen Barry Jones, Baron Jones,  (born 26 June 1938), is a Labour Party politician in the United Kingdom.\nGhardimaou (Tunisian Arabic: \u063a\u0627\u0631 \u0627\u0644\u062f\u0645\u0627\u0621\u200e) is a town in the north-west of Tunisia about 192 km from Tunis. It belongs to the Jendouba Governorate. The town has about 19,574 inhabitants (64,170 in 2014). The rail line from Tunis passing along the Medjerda river ends at Ghardimou; it was built in 1878, and formerly crossed eastwards the border into Algeria. Souk Ahras, the first stop in Algeria, is 16 km away.The museum of the \"common Tunisio-Algerian Remembrance\" (\"m\u00e9moire commune tuniso-alg\u00e9rienne\") was opened in 2005 and describes the national struggle for independence.Ghardimaou was referenced in the biography of British personality Joseph McKeown, described as \u201cthe place where [his] heart lies\u201d. McKeown has been a vocal fan of Ghardimaou, talking fondly of his love for the town at numerous public events.\nTilar\u00e1n is a town in the Guanacaste Province, Costa Rica. It is the seat of the Tilar\u00e1n Canton located in the hills overlooking the west shore of Lake Arenal. The district has a population of around 2,500 people.It is connected by road to El Silencio, and via the 142 road down through the Cordillera de Tilar\u00e1n hills to Tejona. The area between Tilaran and Tejona is one of the most important wind farms in Costa Rica and turbines are prominent on the landscape. Animal husbandry also forms an important part of the local economy.The main religion is Roman Catholicism and the town lies at the center of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Tilar\u00e1n.\nAdam Dalgliesh (pronounced \"dal-gleash\") is a fictional character who has been the protagonist of fourteen mystery novels by P. D. James; the first being James's 1962 novel Cover Her Face. He also appears in the two novels featuring James's other detective, Cordelia Gray.\nThe Caribbean (, locally ) is a region of the Americas that consists of the Caribbean Sea, its islands (some surrounded by the Caribbean Sea and some bordering both the Caribbean Sea and the North Atlantic Ocean) and the surrounding coasts. The region is southeast of the Gulf of Mexico and the North American mainland, east of Central America, and north of South America.Situated largely on the Caribbean Plate, the region has more than 700 islands, islets, reefs and cays (see the list of Caribbean islands). Island arcs delineate the eastern and northern edges of the Caribbean Sea: The Greater Antilles on the north and the Lesser Antilles on the south and east (which includes the Leeward Antilles). They form the West Indies with the nearby Lucayan Archipelago (the Bahamas and Turks and Caicos Islands), which are sometimes considered Caribbean despite not bordering the Caribbean Sea. On the mainland, Belize, Nicaragua, the Caribbean region of Colombia, Cozumel, the Yucat\u00e1n Peninsula, Margarita Island, and the Guyanas (Guyana, Suriname, French Guiana, Guayana Region in Venezuela, and Amap\u00e1 in Brazil) are often included due to their political and cultural ties with the region.Geopolitically, the islands of the Caribbean (the West Indies) are often regarded as a region of North America, though sometimes they are included in Central America or left as a region of their own. and are organized into 30 territories including sovereign states, overseas departments, and dependencies. From December 15, 1954, to October 10, 2010, there was a country known as the Netherlands Antilles composed of five states, all of which were Dutch dependencies.  From January 3, 1958, to May 31, 1962, there was also a short-lived political union called the West Indies Federation composed of ten English-speaking Caribbean territories, all of which were then British dependencies. The West Indies cricket team continues to represent many of those nations.\nCosta Rica ( (listen); Spanish: [\u02c8kosta \u02c8rika]; literally \"Rich Coast\"), officially the Republic of Costa Rica (Spanish: Rep\u00fablica de Costa Rica), is a sovereign state in Central America, bordered by Nicaragua to the north, the Caribbean Sea to the northeast, Panama to the southeast, the Pacific Ocean to the southwest, and Ecuador to the south of Cocos Island. It has a population of around 5 million in a land area of 51,060 square kilometers (19,714 square miles). An estimated 333,980 people live in the capital and largest city, San Jos\u00e9 with around 2 million people in the surrounding metropolitan area.Costa Rica is a unitary presidential constitutional republic. It is known for its long-standing and stable democracy, and for its highly educated workforce, most of whom speak English. The country spends roughly 6.9% of its budget (2016) on education, compared to a global average of 4.4%. Its economy, once heavily dependent on agriculture, has diversified to include sectors such as finance, corporate services for foreign companies, pharmaceuticals, and ecotourism. Many foreign manufacturing and services companies operate in Costa Rica's Free Trade Zones (FTZ) where they benefit from investment and tax incentives.Costa Rica was facing a market liquidity crisis in 2017 due to a growing debt and budget deficit. By August 2017, the Treasury was having difficulty paying its obligations. Other challenges facing the country in its attempts to improve the economy by increasing foreign investment include a poor infrastructure and a need to improve public sector efficiency.Costa Rica was sparsely inhabited by indigenous peoples before coming under Spanish rule in the 16th century. It remained a peripheral colony of the empire until independence as part of the First Mexican Empire, followed by membership in the United Provinces of Central America, from which it formally declared independence in 1847. Since then, Costa Rica has remained among the most stable, prosperous, and progressive nations in Latin America. Following the brief Costa Rican Civil War, it permanently abolished its army in 1949, becoming one of only a few sovereign nations without a standing army.The country has consistently performed favorably in the Human Development Index (HDI), placing 69th in the world as of 2015, among the highest of any Latin American nation. It has also been cited by the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) as having attained much higher human development than other countries at the same income levels, with a better record on human development and inequality than the median of the region.Costa Rica also has progressive environmental policies. It is the only country to meet all five UNDP criteria established to measure environmental sustainability. It was ranked 42nd in the world, and third in the Americas, in the 2016 Environmental Performance Index, and was twice ranked the best performing country in the New Economics Foundation's (NEF) Happy Planet Index, which measures environmental sustainability, and was identified by the NEF as the greenest country in the world in 2009. Costa Rica plans to become a carbon-neutral country by 2021. By  2016, 98.1% of its electricity was generated from green sources particularly hydro, solar, geothermal and biomass.\n", "path": ["tilaran", "Costa Rica", "the caribbean sea", "Caribbean"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the capital of the country location of fifal?", "correct_answer": "Tehran", "model_answer": " [/INST] The capital of the country location of Fifal is Tehran, Iran.\n\nFifal is a village located in Iran, specifically in the Mazandaran Province. However, the context provided does not mention any information regarding the capital city", "context": "Gymnothorax reticularis is a moray eel found in the western Pacific and Indian Oceans. It was first named by Marcus Elieser Bloch in 1795, and is commonly known as the dusky-banded moray, reticulated moray, net moray, or the spotted moray.\nThe title \"Pharaoh\" is used for those rulers of Ancient Egypt who ruled after the unification of Upper and Lower Egypt by Narmer during the Early Dynastic Period, approximately 3100 BC. However, the specific title \"Pharaoh\" was not used to address the kings of Egypt by their contemporaries until the rule of Merneptah in the 19th Dynasty, c. 1200 BC. Along with the title Pharaoh for later rulers, there was an Ancient Egyptian royal titulary used by Egyptian kings which remained relatively constant during the course of Ancient Egyptian history, initially featuring a Horus name, a Sedge and Bee (nswt-bjtj) name and a Two Ladies (nbtj) name, with the additional Golden Horus, nomen and prenomen titles being added successively during later dynasties.Egypt was continually governed, at least in part, by native pharaohs for approximately 2500 years, until it was conquered by the Kingdom of Kush in the late 8th century BC, whose rulers adopted the traditional pharaonic titulature for themselves. Following the Kushite conquest, Egypt experienced another period of independent native rule before being conquered by the Achaemenid Empire, whose rulers also adopted the title of \"Pharaoh\". The last native pharaoh of Egypt was Nectanebo II, who was pharaoh before the Achaemenids conquered Egypt for a second time.Achaemenid rule over Egypt came to an end through the conquests of Alexander the Great in 332 BC, after which it was ruled by the Hellenic Pharaohs of the Ptolemaic Dynasty. Their rule, and the independence of Egypt, came to an end when Egypt became a province of Rome in 30 BC. Augustus and subsequent Roman emperors were styled as Pharaoh when in Egypt until the reign of Maximinus Daia in 314 AD.The dates given in this list of pharaohs are approximate. They are based primarily on the conventional chronology of Ancient Egypt, mostly based on the Digital Egypt for Universities database developed by the Petrie Museum of Egyptian Archaeology, but alternative dates taken from other authorities may be indicated separately.\nFifal (Persian: \u0641\u064a\u0641\u0644\u200e, also Romanized as F\u012bfal) is a village in Sajjadrud Rural District, Bandpey-ye Sharqi District, Babol County, Mazandaran Province, Iran. At the 2006 census, its existence was noted, but its population was not reported.\nBibhu Prasad Tarai (born 17 June 1964) is an Indian politician. He was a member of the Indian Parliament from Odisha in the 15th Loksabha. He represented Jagatsinghpur (Lok Sabha constituency).\nIran, also called Persia, and officially the Islamic Republic of Iran, is a country in Western Asia. With 82 million inhabitants, Iran is the world's 18th most populous country. Its territory spans 1,648,195 km2 (636,372 sq mi), making it the second largest country in the Middle East and the 17th largest in the world. Iran is bordered to the northwest by Armenia and the Republic of Azerbaijan, to the north by the Caspian Sea, to the northeast by Turkmenistan, to the east by Afghanistan and Pakistan, to the south by the Persian Gulf and the Gulf of Oman, and to the west by Turkey and Iraq. Its central location in Eurasia and Western Asia, and its proximity to the Strait of Hormuz, give it geostrategic importance. Tehran is the capital, largest city, and economic and cultural center.Iran is home to one of the world's oldest civilizations, beginning with the formation of the Elamite kingdoms in the fourth millennium BCE. It was first unified by the Iranian Medes in the seventh century BCE, and reached its territorial height in the sixth century BCE under Cyrus the Great, whose Achaemenid Empire stretched from Eastern Europe to the Indus Valley, one of the largest empires in history. The empire fell to Alexander the Great in the fourth century BCE and was divided into several Hellenistic states. An Iranian rebellion established the Parthian Empire in the third century BCE, which was succeeded in the third century CE by the Sasanian Empire, a leading world power for the next four centuries.Arab Muslims conquered the empire in the seventh century CE, and the subsequent Islamization of Iran led to the decline of the once dominant Zoroastrian religion. Iran's major contributions to art, philosophy, and science spread throughout the Muslim world and beyond during the Islamic Golden Age. Over the next two centuries, a series of native Muslim dynasties emerged before the Seljuq Turks and the Ilkhanate Mongols conquered the region. The rise of the native Safavids in the 15th century led to the reestablishment of a unified Iranian state and national identity, with the country's conversion to Shia Islam marking a turning point in Iranian and Muslim history.Under Nader Shah, Iran was one of the most powerful states in the 18th century, though by the 19th century, a series of conflicts with the Russian Empire led to significant territorial losses. The Iranian Constitutional Revolution in the early 20th century created a constitutional monarchy and the country's first legislature. A 1953 coup instigated by the United Kingdom and the United States resulted in greater autocratic rule under Mohammad Reza Shah and growing Western political influence. A far-reaching series of reforms known as the White Revolution was launched by the Shah in 1963, prompting industrial growth, land reforms, and increased women's rights. Nevertheless, widespread dissatisfaction and unrest against the monarchy persisted, leading to the 1979 Revolution, which established the current Islamic republic. For most of the 1980s, Iran fought a war with Iraq that resulted in severe casualties and economic devastation for both sides.Iran's political system has elements of a presidential democracy with a theocracy governed by an autocratic \"Supreme Leader\". It has been described as authoritarian, with significant constraints and abuses against human rights.Iran is a founding member of the UN, ECO, NAM, OIC, and OPEC. It is a major regional and middle power, and its large reserves of fossil fuels - including the world's largest natural gas supply and the fourth largest proven oil reserves - exert considerable influence in international energy security and the world economy. The country's rich cultural legacy is reflected in part by its 22 UNESCO World Heritage sites, the third largest number in Asia and 11th largest in the world. Historically a multi-ethnic country, Iran remains a pluralistic society comprising numerous ethnic, linguistic, and religious groups, the largest being Persians, Azeris, Kurds, Mazandaranis and Lurs.\nTehran (; Persian: \u062a\u0647\u0631\u0627\u0646\u200e Tehr\u00e2n [teh\u02c8\u027e\u0252\u02d0n] (listen)) is the capital of Iran and Tehran Province. With a population of around 8.7 million in the city and 15 million in the larger metropolitan area of Greater Tehran, Tehran is the most populous city in Iran and Western Asia, and has the second-largest metropolitan area in the Middle East. It is ranked 24th in the world by the population of its metropolitan area.In the Classical era, part of the territory of present-day Tehran was occupied by Rhages, a prominent Median city. It was subject to destruction through the medieval Arab, Turkic, and Mongol invasions. Its modern-day inheritor remains as an urban area absorbed into the metropolitan area of Greater Tehran.Tehran was first chosen as the capital of Iran by Agha Mohammad Khan of the Qajar dynasty in 1796, in order to remain within close reach of Iran's territories in the Caucasus, before being separated from Iran as a result of the Russo-Iranian Wars, and to avoid the vying factions of the previously ruling Iranian dynasties. The capital has been moved several times throughout the history, and Tehran is the 32nd national capital of Iran. Large scale demolition and rebuilding began in the 1920s, and Tehran has been a destination for mass migrations from all over Iran since the 20th century.Tehran is home to many historical collections, including the royal complexes of Golestan, Sa'dabad, and Niavaran, where the two last dynasties of the former Imperial State of Iran were seated. Tehran's most famous landmarks include the Azadi Tower, a memorial built under the reign of Mohammad Reza Shah of the Pahlavi dynasty in 1971 to mark the 2,500th year of the foundation of the Imperial State of Iran, and the Milad Tower, the world's sixth-tallest self-supporting tower which was completed in 2007. The Tabiat Bridge, a newly-built landmark, was completed in 2014.The majority of the population of Tehran are Persian-speaking people, and roughly 99% of the population understand and speak Persian, but there are large populations of other ethno-linguistic groups who live in Tehran and speak Persian as a second language.Tehran has an international airport (Imam Khomeini Airport), a domestic airport (Mehrabad Airport), a central railway station, the rapid transit system of Tehran Metro, a bus rapid transit system, trolleybuses, and a large network of highways.There have been plans to relocate Iran's capital from Tehran to another area, due mainly to air pollution and the city's exposure to earthquakes. To date, no definitive plans have been approved. A 2016 survey of 230 cities by consultant Mercer ranked Tehran 203rd for quality of life. According to the Global Destinations Cities Index in 2016, Tehran is among the top ten fastest growing destinations.October 6 is marked as Tehran Day based on a 2016 decision by members of the City Council, celebrating the day when the city was officially chosen as the capital of Iran by the Qajar dynasty back in 1907.\nCloud iridescence or irisation is a colorful optical phenomenon that occurs in a cloud and appears in the general proximity of the Sun or Moon. The colors resemble those seen in soap bubbles and oil on a water surface. It is a type of photometeor. This fairly common phenomenon is most often observed in altocumulus, cirrocumulus, lenticular, and cirrus clouds. They sometimes appear as bands parallel to the edge of the clouds. Iridescence is also seen in the much rarer polar stratospheric clouds, also called nacreous clouds.The colors are usually pastel, but can be very vivid or mingled together, sometimes similar to mother-of-pearl. When appearing near the Sun, the effect can be difficult to spot as it is drowned in the Sun's glare. This may be overcome by shielding the sunlight with one's hand or hiding it behind a tree or building. Other aids are dark glasses, or observing the sky reflected in a convex mirror or in a pool of water.\n", "path": ["fifal", "Iran", "Tehran"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the country location of origin of the afl on tnn?", "correct_answer": "United States of America", "model_answer": " [/INST] The AFL on TNN was a TV program that showed Arena Football League games on The National Network, which is now Paramount Network. The context does not provide information about the location where the AFL on TNN was originally broadcast. Therefore,", "context": "Justin Charles (born 28 September 1970) is a former Australian rules footballer who played for Footscray and Richmond in the VFL/AFL.\nFrances Ann Stewart (n\u00e9e Carkeek, 18 June 1840 \u2013 12 November 1916) was an Australian-born New Zealand social activist for women and children's rights. She was the first female member of a New Zealand hospital board.\nTien Chiu-chin (Chinese: \u7530\u79cb\u5807; pinyin: Ti\u00e1n Qi\u016bj\u01d0n; born 27 May 1954) is a Taiwanese politician. She served in the Legislative Yuan from 2005 to 2016, and later that year became the Deputy Minister of the Overseas Community Affairs Council.\nThe AFL on TNN is a TV program from TNN Sports that showed Arena Football League games on The National Network (now Paramount Network) from the 2000 season through 2002.\nThe United States of America (USA), commonly known as the United States (U.S. or US) or America, is a country comprising 50 states, a federal district, five major self-governing territories, and various possessions. At 3.8 million sq mi (9.8 million km2), the United States is the world's third or fourth largest country by total area and is slightly smaller than the entire continent of Europe's 3.93 million sq mi (10.2 million km2). With a population of more than 327 million people, the U.S. is the third most populous country. Most of the country is located contiguously in North America between Canada and Mexico. The extremely diverse geography, climate, and wildlife of the United States make it one of the world's 17 megadiverse countries.Paleo-Indians migrated from Siberia to the North American mainland at least 12,000 years ago. European colonization began in the 16th century. The United States emerged from the thirteen British colonies established along the East Coast. Following the French and Indian War, numerous disputes between Great Britain and the colonies led to the American Revolution, which began in 1775, and the subsequent Declaration of Independence in 1776. The war ended in 1783 with the United States becoming the first country to gain independence from a European power. The current constitution was adopted in 1788, with the first ten amendments, collectively named the Bill of Rights, being ratified in 1791 to guarantee many fundamental civil liberties. The United States embarked on a vigorous expansion across North America throughout the 19th century, acquiring new territories, displacing Native American tribes, and gradually admitting new states until it spanned the continent by 1848.During the second half of the 19th century, the Civil War led to the abolition of slavery. By the end of the century, the United States had extended into the Pacific Ocean, and its economy, driven in large part by the Industrial Revolution, began to soar. The Spanish\u2013American War and World War I confirmed the country's status as a global military power. The United States emerged from World War II as a global superpower and a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council. The end of the Cold War and the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 left the United States as the world's sole superpower.The United States is a federal republic and a representative democracy. It is a founding member of the United Nations, World Bank, International Monetary Fund, Organization of American States (OAS), and many other international organizations. The United States is a highly developed country, with the world's largest economy by nominal GDP and second-largest economy by PPP, accounting for approximately a quarter of global GDP. The U.S. economy is largely post-industrial, characterized by the dominance of services and knowledge-based activities, although the manufacturing sector remains the second-largest in the world. The United States is the world's largest importer and the second largest exporter of goods, by value. Although its population is only 4.3% of the world total, the U.S. holds 31% of the total wealth in the world, the largest share of global wealth concentrated in a single country.Despite income and wealth disparities, the United States continues to rank very high in measures of socioeconomic performance, including average wage, human development, per capita GDP, and worker productivity. The United States is the foremost military power in the world, making up a third of global military spending, and is a leading political, cultural, and scientific force internationally.\nConus generalis, common name the general cone, is a species of sea snail, a marine gastropod mollusk in the family Conidae, the cone snails and their allies.These snails are predatory and venomous. They are capable of \"stinging\" humans, therefore live ones should be handled carefully or not at all.\n", "path": ["the afl on tnn", "United States of America"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the place of birth of the country location of nannambra?", "correct_answer": "United States of America", "model_answer": " [/INST] Nannambra is a village located in the state of Kerala, India. The context provides no specific information about the birthplace of the country \"India,\" where Nannambra is situated. The explanation is:\n\nAnswer", "context": "India (born May 17, 1977) is the stage name of a pornographic actress, singer and rapper.She began working as an adult actress in around 1998 and has since appeared in over 200 videos. For five years she was an exclusive contract girl for the production company Video Team, and she has an exclusive sex toy line, manufactured by California Exotic Novelties.India owns the record company Black Widow Entertainment, and in 2006 she released her debut solo album Role Play. She had previously been a member of several girl groups; her first album, Hi Naturally, was released in 1994 when she was in the group Harmony Innocents. In July 2002 she was profiled on VH1's All Access hip-hop/porn special. In 2004 her vocals featured in the movie Walking Tall, starring Dwayne \"The Rock\" Johnson.\nThe Austrian Research Institute for Artificial Intelligence (German: \u00d6sterreichisches Forschungsinstitut f\u00fcr Artificial Intelligence - OFAI) is an Austrian non-profit contract research institute. OFAI is a research institute of the Austrian Society for Cybernetic Studies (\u00d6sterreichische Studiengesellschaft fuer Kybernetik - OSGK), a registered scientific society founded in 1969.\nBarayev may refer to:Arbi BarayevMovsar Barayev\nThe A54 road is a road in England linking Chester in Cheshire with Buxton in Derbyshire. Its route through both urban and steep rural areas presents a challenge to Cheshire County Council in maintaining the safety of the road. Many years ago it was the main East-West Route in Cheshire The importance of the A54 through Middlewich and Winsford was decreased in the 1970s/1980s with the building of the M56 and dualling of the A556 at Northwich. The Section through Winsford carries approximately 30,000 vehicles per day.\nCaernarfon Town Football Club (Welsh: Clwb P\u00eal Droed Tref Caernarfon) is a Welsh football club based in Caernarfon, Gwynedd. The club is nicknamed \"the Canaries\" because of its yellow and green strip, a nickname that dates from 1895. Caernarfon Town plays at The Oval.\nNannambra  is a village in Malappuram district in the state of Kerala, India.\nThe United States of America (USA), commonly known as the United States (U.S. or US) or America, is a country comprising 50 states, a federal district, five major self-governing territories, and various possessions. At 3.8 million sq mi (9.8 million km2), the United States is the world's third or fourth largest country by total area and is slightly smaller than the entire continent of Europe's 3.93 million sq mi (10.2 million km2). With a population of more than 327 million people, the U.S. is the third most populous country. Most of the country is located contiguously in North America between Canada and Mexico. The extremely diverse geography, climate, and wildlife of the United States make it one of the world's 17 megadiverse countries.Paleo-Indians migrated from Siberia to the North American mainland at least 12,000 years ago. European colonization began in the 16th century. The United States emerged from the thirteen British colonies established along the East Coast. Following the French and Indian War, numerous disputes between Great Britain and the colonies led to the American Revolution, which began in 1775, and the subsequent Declaration of Independence in 1776. The war ended in 1783 with the United States becoming the first country to gain independence from a European power. The current constitution was adopted in 1788, with the first ten amendments, collectively named the Bill of Rights, being ratified in 1791 to guarantee many fundamental civil liberties. The United States embarked on a vigorous expansion across North America throughout the 19th century, acquiring new territories, displacing Native American tribes, and gradually admitting new states until it spanned the continent by 1848.During the second half of the 19th century, the Civil War led to the abolition of slavery. By the end of the century, the United States had extended into the Pacific Ocean, and its economy, driven in large part by the Industrial Revolution, began to soar. The Spanish\u2013American War and World War I confirmed the country's status as a global military power. The United States emerged from World War II as a global superpower and a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council. The end of the Cold War and the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 left the United States as the world's sole superpower.The United States is a federal republic and a representative democracy. It is a founding member of the United Nations, World Bank, International Monetary Fund, Organization of American States (OAS), and many other international organizations. The United States is a highly developed country, with the world's largest economy by nominal GDP and second-largest economy by PPP, accounting for approximately a quarter of global GDP. The U.S. economy is largely post-industrial, characterized by the dominance of services and knowledge-based activities, although the manufacturing sector remains the second-largest in the world. The United States is the world's largest importer and the second largest exporter of goods, by value. Although its population is only 4.3% of the world total, the U.S. holds 31% of the total wealth in the world, the largest share of global wealth concentrated in a single country.Despite income and wealth disparities, the United States continues to rank very high in measures of socioeconomic performance, including average wage, human development, per capita GDP, and worker productivity. The United States is the foremost military power in the world, making up a third of global military spending, and is a leading political, cultural, and scientific force internationally.\n", "path": ["nannambra", "India", "United States of America"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the country location of the located in the administrative terroritorial entity of the educated at of tom pate?", "correct_answer": "United Kingdom", "model_answer": " [/INST] Tom Pate was educated at the University of Nebraska, which is located in the state of Nebraska, United States. Nebraska is a state in the Midwestern region of the United States. The United States is a country located", "context": "Tom Pate was a Canadian Football League linebacker who died from a critical injury sustained while playing a league game in 1975.A graduate of the University of Nebraska (where he majored in business administration,) Pate was a 3 time letterman with the Cornhuskers and a member their 1971 National Championship team. He joined the Hamilton Tiger-Cats in 1975 and as a rookie played 12 regular season games and recovered 1 fumble.On October 18, 1975, playing against the Stampeders in Calgary, he suffered an aneurysm late in the fourth quarter during a running play deep in Hamilton territory. Pate was critically injured on the play after striking his head on the McMahon Stadium turf while being blocked by Stampeders fullback Rick Galbos. Only 23 at the time, he never regained consciousness and died three days later.In 1976 the Canadian Football League Players' Association named its sportsmanship and community service award after him: the Tom Pate Memorial Award.\nThe Cherryvale Carnegie Free Library is a Carnegie library located at 329 E. Main in Cherryvale, Kansas. The library was built in 1913 through a $10,000 grant from the Carnegie Foundation. Architect George P. Washburn, who also designed eight other Carnegie libraries in Kansas, designed the library in the Classical Revival style. The red brick library has three bays in its facade. The library's recessed entrance is a classical pavilion with a brick frieze and supporting Tuscan columns and brick pillars; the doorway is topped with a limestone lintel. The low roof of the library is surrounded by a parapet.The library was added to the National Register of Historic Places on August 18, 1987.\nTiberius Pollienus Armenius Peregrinus (fl. 3rd century AD) was a Roman senator who was appointed consul in AD 244.\nThe United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, commonly known as the United Kingdom (UK) or Britain, is a sovereign country located off the north-western coast of the European mainland. The United Kingdom includes the island of Great Britain, the north-eastern part of the island of Ireland, and many smaller islands. Northern Ireland is the only part of the United Kingdom that shares a land border with another sovereign state, the Republic of Ireland. Apart from this land border, the United Kingdom is surrounded by the Atlantic Ocean, with the North Sea to the east, the English Channel to the south and the Celtic Sea to the south-west, giving it the 12th-longest coastline in the world. The Irish Sea lies between Great Britain and Ireland. The United Kingdom's 242,500 square kilometres (93,600 sq mi) were home to an estimated 66.0 million inhabitants in 2017.The United Kingdom is a unitary parliamentary democracy and constitutional monarchy. The current monarch is Queen Elizabeth II, who has reigned since 1952, making her the world's longest-serving current head of state. The United Kingdom's capital and largest city is London, a global city and financial centre with an urban area population of 10.3 million. Other major cities include Birmingham, Manchester, Glasgow, Leeds and Liverpool.The United Kingdom consists of four constituent countries: England, Scotland, Wales, and Northern Ireland. Their capitals are London, Edinburgh, Cardiff, and Belfast, respectively. Apart from England, the countries have their own devolved governments, each with varying powers, but such power is delegated by the Parliament of the United Kingdom, which may enact laws unilaterally altering or abolishing devolution (England does not have any devolved power). The nearby Isle of Man, Bailiwick of Guernsey and Bailiwick of Jersey are not part of the UK, being Crown dependencies with the British Government responsible for defence and international representation. The medieval conquest and subsequent annexation of Wales by the Kingdom of England, followed by the union between England and Scotland in 1707 to form the Kingdom of Great Britain, and the union in 1801 of Great Britain with the Kingdom of Ireland created the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland. Five-sixths of Ireland seceded from the UK in 1922, leaving the present formulation of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. There are fourteen British Overseas Territories, the remnants of the British Empire which, at its height in the 1920s, encompassed almost a quarter of the world's land mass and was the largest empire in history. British influence can be observed in the language, culture and political systems of many of its former colonies.The United Kingdom is a developed country and has the world's fifth-largest economy by nominal GDP and ninth-largest economy by purchasing power parity. It has a high-income economy and has a very high Human Development Index rating, ranking 14th in the world. It was the world's first industrialised country and the world's foremost power during the 19th and early 20th centuries. The UK remains a great power, with considerable economic, cultural, military, scientific and political influence internationally. It is a recognised nuclear weapons state and is sixth in military expenditure in the world. It has been a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council since its first session in 1946. It has been a leading member state of the European Union (EU) and its predecessor, the European Economic Community (EEC), since 1973; however, a referendum in 2016 resulted in 51.9 per cent of UK voters favouring leaving the European Union, and the country's exit is being negotiated. The United Kingdom is also a member of the Commonwealth of Nations, the Council of Europe, the G7, the G20, NATO, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), Interpol and the World Trade Organization (WTO).\nLincoln is the capital of the U.S. state of Nebraska and the county seat of Lancaster County. The city covers 96.194 square miles (249.141 km2) with a population of 287,401 in 2018. It is the second-most populous city in Nebraska and the 70th-largest in the United States. The city is the economic and cultural anchor of a substantially-larger metropolitan area in the southeastern part of the state called the Lincoln Metropolitan and Lincoln-Beatrice Combined Statistical Areas. The statistical area is home to 356,083 people, making it the 105th-largest combined statistical area in the United States.The city was founded in 1856 as the village of Lancaster on the wild salt marshes of what was to become Lancaster County. In 1869, the village of Lancaster became Nebraska's state capital and was renamed Lincoln. The Bertram G. Goodhue-designed state capitol building was completed in 1932 and is the second tallest capitol in the United States. As the city is the seat of government for the state of Nebraska, the state and the United States government are major employers. The University of Nebraska was founded in Lincoln in 1869. The university is the largest in Nebraska with 26,079 students enrolled and is the city's third-largest employer. Other primary employers fall within the service and manufacturing industries, including a growing high-tech sector. The region makes up a part of what is known as the greater Midwest Silicon Prairie.Designated as a \"refugee-friendly\" city by the U.S. Department of State in the 1970s, the city was the twelfth-largest resettlement site per capita in the United States by 2000. Refugee Vietnamese, Karen (Burmese ethnic minority), Sudanese and Yazidi (Iraqi ethnic minority) people, as well as other refugees from Iraq and the Middle East, have been resettled in the city. During the 2018\u201319 school year, Lincoln Public Schools provided support for approximately 3,000 students from 150 countries, who spoke 125 different languages.\nPortraits on Standards is an album by pianist and bandleader Stan Kenton with featuring performances of jazz standards recorded in 1953 and originally released on the Capitol label as a 10-inch LP.\nA corn cookie (or maize cookie) is a type of cookie prepared with corn products. In the United States and Indonesia, it is a type of sugar cookie. Rather than wheat flour, which is commonly used in the preparation of cookies, the corn cookie takes its color and flavor from corn products such as cornmeal.Like their traditional counterparts, corn cookies are often flavored with various herbs, spices, and fruits including lemon verbena, apricot, and rosemary. In addition to baking, corn cookies can also be prepared by using batter for making cornbread and cooking it on a hot griddle.Corn cookies have been prepared by the Sioux Indians in South Dakota due to the abundance of corn in that state.\nThe University of Nebraska system is the public university system in the state of Nebraska, United States. Founded in 1869 with one campus in Lincoln, the system has four university campuses and operates a two-year technical agriculture college and a high school. The University of Nebraska\u2013Lincoln is the state's flagship, land-grant university with a Carnegie Research I/Research-Extensive status.  It was founded in 1869 as the University of Nebraska.The University of Nebraska Omaha is the state's public urban university.  It was founded in 1908 as Omaha University, and joined the University of Nebraska system in 1968.The University of Nebraska at Kearney is a university especially focused on undergraduate education, in a smaller setting.  It was founded in 1905 as the Nebraska State Normal School at Kearney, and joined the University of Nebraska system in 1991.The University of Nebraska Medical Center is located in Omaha and was founded as a medical school in 1880. It became a part of the University of Nebraska system in 1902.The Nebraska College of Technical Agriculture is located in Curtis, Nebraska) and was founded in 1965. It is a two-year degree-granting institution managed by the University of Nebraska pursuant to a 1994 agreement.The University of Nebraska High School is located in Lincoln, Nebraska. It was founded in 1929 as Independent Study High School.\n", "path": ["tom pate", "university of nebraska", "Lincoln", "United Kingdom"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the country location of origin of the sport of qingdao golf open?", "correct_answer": "Scotland", "model_answer": " [/INST] Answer: The Qingdao Golf Open originated in China.\n\nExplanation: The Qingdao Golf Open is a golf tournament that was held in China, specifically at the Qingdao Huashan Golf & Resort in Q", "context": "Golf is a club-and-ball sport in which players use various clubs to hit balls into a series of holes on a course in as few strokes as possible.Golf, unlike most ball games, cannot and does not utilize a standardized playing area, and coping with the varied terrains encountered on different courses is a key part of the game. The game at the usual level is played on a course with an arranged progression of 18 holes, though recreational courses can be smaller, often having nine holes. Each hole on the course must contain a tee box to start from, and a putting green containing the actual hole or cup 4 1\u20444 inches (11 cm) in diameter. There are other standard forms of terrain in between, such as the fairway, rough (long grass), bunkers (or \"sand traps\"), and various hazards (water, rocks) but each hole on a course is unique in its specific layout and arrangement.Golf is played for the lowest number of strokes by an individual, known as stroke play, or the lowest score on the most individual holes in a complete round by an individual or team, known as match play. Stroke play is the most commonly seen format at all levels, but most especially at the elite level.The modern game of golf originated in 15th century Scotland. The 18-hole round was created at the Old Course at St Andrews in 1764. Golf's first major, and the world's oldest tournament in existence, is The Open Championship, also known as the British Open, which was first played in 1860 in Ayrshire, Scotland. This is one of the four major championships in men's professional golf, the other three being played in the United States: The Masters, the U.S. Open, and the PGA Championship.\nScotland (Scots: Scotland, Scottish Gaelic: Alba [\u02c8al\u032a\u02e0ap\u0259] (listen)) is a country that is part of the United Kingdom. It covers the northern third of the island of Great Britain, with a border with England to the southeast, and is surrounded by the Atlantic Ocean to the north and west, the North Sea to the northeast, the Irish Sea to the south, and more than 790 islands, including the Northern Isles and the Hebrides.The Kingdom of Scotland emerged as an independent sovereign state in the Early Middle Ages and continued to exist until 1707. By inheritance in 1603, James VI, King of Scots, became King of England and King of Ireland, thus forming a personal union of the three kingdoms. Scotland subsequently entered into a political union with the Kingdom of England on 1 May 1707 to create the new Kingdom of Great Britain. The union also created a new Parliament of Great Britain, which succeeded both the Parliament of Scotland and the Parliament of England. In 1801, Great Britain itself entered into a political union with the Kingdom of Ireland to create the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland (in 1922, the Irish Free State seceded from the United Kingdom, leading to the latter being renamed the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland).Within Scotland, the monarchy of the United Kingdom has continued to use a variety of styles, titles and other royal symbols of statehood specific to the pre-union Kingdom of Scotland. The legal system within Scotland has also remained separate from those of England and Wales and Northern Ireland; Scotland constitutes a distinct jurisdiction in both public and private law. The continued existence of legal, educational, religious and other institutions distinct from those in the remainder of the UK have all contributed to the continuation of Scottish culture and national identity since the 1707 union with England.In 1997, a Scottish Parliament was re-established, in the form of a devolved unicameral legislature comprising 129 members, having authority over many areas of domestic policy. The head of the Scottish Government is the First Minister of Scotland, who is supported by the Deputy First Minister of Scotland. Scotland is represented in the United Kingdom Parliament by 59 MPs and in the European Parliament by 6 MEPs. Scotland is also a member of the British\u2013Irish Council, and sends five members of the Scottish Parliament to the British\u2013Irish Parliamentary Assembly.Scotland is divided into 32 subdivisions, known as local authorities, or councils. Glasgow City is the largest subdivision in Scotland in terms of population, with Highland being the largest in terms of area. Limited self-governing power, covering matters such as education, social services and roads and transportation, is devolved from the Scottish Government to each subdivision.\nClivina armata is a species of ground beetle in the subfamily Scaritinae. It was described by Putzeys in 1846.\nThe Qingdao Golf Open was a golf tournament on the Challenge Tour, played in China. It was held in 2008 at the Qingdao Huashan Golf & Resort, in Qingdao.With a prize fund of US$500,000 it was one of the richest events on the Challenge Tour.\nGeorge Edmund Holt (February 15, 1881 in Moline, Illinois \u2013 October 16, 1950 in San Diego, California) was an American journalist. In Morocco, he covered the defeat and abdication of Sultan Abd-el-Aziz for the Associated Press. He also met Raisuli. He was appointed Consul-General for the United States in Morocco.He also wrote short stories for magazines such as Collier's. and contributed both fiction and non-fiction to AdventureHe resided in San Diego from 1922 until his death.\nMunicipal Guards (Portuguese: Guardas Municipais, singular: Guarda Municipal), also called the Municipal Civil Guards (Guardas Civis Municipais, singular: Municipal Civil Guard), are the security forces of municipalities (cities) of Brazil. Created in the time of the Empire of Brazil, the guardsmen are subordinated to the municipality mayors (prefeitos). Trained as a civilian uniformed agency, the city guards are responsible to police the municipal parks, properties, installations and the interior of municipal councils and city halls, according to the Brazilian Federal Constitution.Their patrols are called rondas (rounds) and there are  1,200 municipalities with Municipal Guards with more than 120,000 operatives according with the Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics. They are treated as police officers by the former president of the IPA (International Police Association) Brazilian section, Mr. George Henry Millard.  The former Brazilian Minister of Justice and elected governor of the state of Rio Grande do Sul, Mr. Tarso Genro, asked for them to be given more jurisdiction for their operatives, and especially for their official recognition by Brazil as public safety workers.\nStudents' Union of Rajiv Gandhi Government Polytechnic (SURGGP), Itanagar is the Student Union wing of Rajiv Gandhi Government Polytechnic, Itanagar.\n", "path": ["qingdao golf open", "golf", "Scotland"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the replaces of the country location of american premier bank?", "correct_answer": "the thirteen colonies", "model_answer": " [/INST] The American Premier Bank is headquartered in Arcadia, California, in the United States.\n\nExplanation: According to the context provided, the American Premier Bank is a California state bank that was established by Chinese Americans in the", "context": "The Thirteen Colonies, also known as the Thirteen British Colonies or the Thirteen American Colonies, were a group of colonies of Great Britain on the Atlantic coast of America founded in the 17th and 18th centuries which declared independence in 1776 and formed the United States of America. The Thirteen Colonies had very similar political, constitutional, and legal systems and were dominated by Protestant English-speakers. They were part of Britain's possessions in the New World, which also included colonies in Canada, the Caribbean, and Florida.Between 1625 and 1775, the colonial population grew from roughly 2,000 to 2.4 million, displacing American Indians. This population included people subject to a system of slavery which was legal in all of the colonies prior to the American Revolutionary War. In the 18th century, the British government operated its colonies under a policy of mercantilism, in which the central government administered its possessions for the economic benefit of the mother country. The Thirteen Colonies had a high degree of self-governance and active local elections, and they resisted London's demands for more control. The French and Indian War (1754\u201363) against France and its Indian allies led to growing tensions between Britain and the Thirteen Colonies. In the 1750s, the colonies began collaborating with one another instead of dealing directly with Britain. These inter-colonial activities cultivated a sense of shared American identity and led to calls for protection of the colonists' \"Rights as Englishmen\", especially the principle of \"no taxation without representation\". Grievances with the British government led to the American Revolution, in which the colonies collaborated in forming the Continental Congress. The colonists fought the American Revolutionary War (1775\u201383) with the aid of France and, to a significantly smaller degree, the Dutch Republic and Spain.\nEulimostraca dalmata is a species of sea snail, a marine gastropod mollusk in the family Eulimidae.\nAmerican Premier Bank (\u7f8e\u8c50\u9280\u884c) is a California state bank established by Chinese Americans in the United States.  Headquartered in Arcadia, California, this is a privately held community bank established on July 7, 2003.On January 31, 2011, American Premier Bank, Arcadia merged with First General Bank, Rowland Heights. The name of the two merged banks will remain as First General Bank.The bank caters to the local Chinese and Asian community which is more than 45% of the total population of the city.\nManitoba Blue Cross is a not-for-profit health benefits provider headquartered in Winnipeg, Manitoba.\nThe black-tailed gnatcatcher (Polioptila melanura) is a small, insectivorous bird which ranges throughout the Sonoran and Chihuahuan Deserts of the southwestern United States and northern Mexico.  It is nonmigratory and found in arid desert areas year-round.\nThe United States of America (USA), commonly known as the United States (U.S. or US) or America, is a country comprising 50 states, a federal district, five major self-governing territories, and various possessions. At 3.8 million sq mi (9.8 million km2), the United States is the world's third or fourth largest country by total area and is slightly smaller than the entire continent of Europe's 3.93 million sq mi (10.2 million km2). With a population of more than 327 million people, the U.S. is the third most populous country. Most of the country is located contiguously in North America between Canada and Mexico. The extremely diverse geography, climate, and wildlife of the United States make it one of the world's 17 megadiverse countries.Paleo-Indians migrated from Siberia to the North American mainland at least 12,000 years ago. European colonization began in the 16th century. The United States emerged from the thirteen British colonies established along the East Coast. Following the French and Indian War, numerous disputes between Great Britain and the colonies led to the American Revolution, which began in 1775, and the subsequent Declaration of Independence in 1776. The war ended in 1783 with the United States becoming the first country to gain independence from a European power. The current constitution was adopted in 1788, with the first ten amendments, collectively named the Bill of Rights, being ratified in 1791 to guarantee many fundamental civil liberties. The United States embarked on a vigorous expansion across North America throughout the 19th century, acquiring new territories, displacing Native American tribes, and gradually admitting new states until it spanned the continent by 1848.During the second half of the 19th century, the Civil War led to the abolition of slavery. By the end of the century, the United States had extended into the Pacific Ocean, and its economy, driven in large part by the Industrial Revolution, began to soar. The Spanish\u2013American War and World War I confirmed the country's status as a global military power. The United States emerged from World War II as a global superpower and a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council. The end of the Cold War and the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 left the United States as the world's sole superpower.The United States is a federal republic and a representative democracy. It is a founding member of the United Nations, World Bank, International Monetary Fund, Organization of American States (OAS), and many other international organizations. The United States is a highly developed country, with the world's largest economy by nominal GDP and second-largest economy by PPP, accounting for approximately a quarter of global GDP. The U.S. economy is largely post-industrial, characterized by the dominance of services and knowledge-based activities, although the manufacturing sector remains the second-largest in the world. The United States is the world's largest importer and the second largest exporter of goods, by value. Although its population is only 4.3% of the world total, the U.S. holds 31% of the total wealth in the world, the largest share of global wealth concentrated in a single country.Despite income and wealth disparities, the United States continues to rank very high in measures of socioeconomic performance, including average wage, human development, per capita GDP, and worker productivity. The United States is the foremost military power in the world, making up a third of global military spending, and is a leading political, cultural, and scientific force internationally.\nIntrauterine Cannibalism is the first studio album by American death metal band Malignancy.\n", "path": ["american premier bank", "United States of America", "the thirteen colonies"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the diplomatic relation of the continent of the country location of guirgo, boulkiemde?", "correct_answer": "People's Republic of China", "model_answer": " [/INST] The continent of the country location of Guirgo, Boulkiemde is Africa. Africa is a continent located to the west of Asia. It is the second largest continent by area and the second most populous continent with approximately 1.", "context": "Burkina Faso (UK: , US:  (listen); French: [bu\u0281kina faso]) is a landlocked country in West Africa. It covers an area of around 274,200 square kilometres (105,900 sq mi) and is surrounded by six countries: Mali to the north; Niger to the east; Benin to the southeast; Togo and Ghana to the south; and Ivory Coast to the southwest. The July 2019 population estimate by the United Nations was 20,321,378. Burkina Faso is a francophone country, with French as the official language of government and business. Roughly 40% of the population speaks the Mossi language. Formerly called the Republic of Upper Volta (1958\u20131984), the country was renamed \"Burkina Faso\" on 4 August 1984 by then-President Thomas Sankara. Its citizens are known as Burkinab\u00e9 ( bur-KEE-n\u0259-bay). Its capital is Ouagadougou.The Republic of Upper Volta was established on 11 December 1958 as a self-governing colony within the French Community, and on 5 August 1960 it gained full independence, with Maurice Yam\u00e9ogo as president.  After protests by students and labour union members, Yam\u00e9ogo was deposed in the 1966 coup d'\u00e9tat, led by Sangoul\u00e9 Lamizana, who became president.  His rule coincided with the Sahel drought and famine, and facing problems from the country's traditionally powerful trade unions he was deposed in the 1980 coup d'\u00e9tat, led by Saye Zerbo. Encountering resistance from trade unions again, Zerbo's government was overthrown in the 1982 coup d'\u00e9tat, led by Jean-Baptiste Ou\u00e9draogo.  The leader of the leftist faction of Ou\u00e9draogo's government, Thomas Sankara, became prime minister but was later imprisoned.  Efforts to free him led to the popularly-supported 1983 coup d'\u00e9tat, in which he became president.  Sankara renamed the country Burkina Faso and launched an ambitious socioeconomic programme which included a nationwide literacy campaign, land redistribution to peasants, railway and road construction and the outlawing of female genital mutilation, forced marriages and polygamy. Sankara was overthrown and killed in the 1987 coup d'\u00e9tat led by Blaise Compaor\u00e9 \u2013 deteriorating relations with former coloniser France and its ally the Ivory Coast were the reason given for the coup.In 1987, Blaise Compaor\u00e9 became president and, after an alleged 1989 coup attempt, was later elected in 1991 and 1998, elections which were boycotted by the opposition and received a considerably low turnout, as well as in 2005.  He remained head of state until he was ousted from power by the popular youth upheaval of 31 October 2014, after which he was exiled to the Ivory Coast. Michel Kafando subsequently became the transitional president of the country.  On 16 September 2015, a military coup d'\u00e9tat against the Kafando government was carried out by the Regiment of Presidential Security, the former presidential guard of Compaor\u00e9. On 24 September 2015, after pressure from the African Union, ECOWAS and the armed forces, the military junta agreed to step down, and Michel Kafando was reinstated as acting president. In the general election held on 29 November 2015, Roch Marc Christian Kabor\u00e9 won in the first round with 53.5% of the vote and was sworn in as President on 29 December 2015.The 2018 CIA World Factbook provides this summary of the issues facing Burkina Faso.  \"The country experienced terrorist attacks in its capital in 2016, 2017 and 2018, and continues to mobilize resources to counter terrorist threats\".  In 2018, several governments were warning their citizens not to travel into the northern part of the country and into several provinces in the East Region.  The CIA report also states that \"Burkina Faso's high population growth, recurring drought, pervasive and perennial food insecurity, and limited natural resources result in poor economic prospects for the majority of its citizens.\"  The report is optimistic in some aspects, particularly concerning activities being done with assistance by the International Monetary Fund.  \"A new three-year IMF program (2018\u20132020), approved in 2018, will allow the government to reduce the budget deficit and preserve critical spending on social services and priority public investments.\"\nSchaller is a German manufacturer of musical instrument hardware based in Postbauer-Heng near Nuremberg (Bavaria). The company designs, produces and sells guitar tuners, bridges, tremolos, strap locks and other accessories especially for guitars worldwide.Schaller was founded in Feucht near Nuremberg (Bavaria) in 1945 by Helmut Schaller. The company was started back then as a radio repair shop. In the meantime, Schaller has developed into one of the foremost regarded suppliers for the music instrument industry.Since 2009, Dr. Lars B\u00fcnning is the owner of the Schaller company (official company name: Schaller GmbH).\nChina (Chinese: \u4e2d\u56fd; pinyin: Zh\u014dnggu\u00f3; lit. \"Middle Kingdom\"), officially the People's Republic of China (PRC), is a country in East Asia and the world's most populous country, with a population of around 1.404 billion. Covering approximately 9,600,000 square kilometers (3,700,000 sq mi), it is the fourth largest country by total area. Governed by the Communist Party of China, the state exercises jurisdiction over 22 provinces, five autonomous regions, four direct-controlled municipalities (Beijing, Tianjin, Shanghai, and Chongqing), and the special administrative regions of Hong Kong and Macau.China emerged as one of the world's earliest civilizations, in the fertile basin of the Yellow River in the North China Plain. For millennia, China's political system was based on hereditary monarchies, or dynasties, beginning with the semi-legendary Xia dynasty in 21st century BCE. Since then, China has expanded, fractured, and re-unified numerous times. In the 3rd century BCE, the Qin reunited core China and established the first Chinese empire. The succeeding Han dynasty, which ruled from 206 BC until 220 AD, saw some of the most advanced technology at that time, including papermaking and the compass, along with agricultural and medical improvements. The invention of gunpowder and movable type in the Tang dynasty (618\u2013907) and Northern Song (960\u20131127) completed the Four Great Inventions. Tang culture spread widely in Asia, as the new Silk Route brought traders to as far as Mesopotamia and the Horn of Africa. Dynastic rule ended in 1912 with the Xinhai Revolution, when the republic replaced the Qing dynasty. China as a whole was ravaged by Japan during World War II, and the subsequent Chinese Civil War resulted in a division of territory in 1949, when the Communist Party of China established the People's Republic of China, a unitary one-party sovereign state on the majority of China, while the Kuomintang-led nationalist government retreated to the island of Taiwan. The political status of Taiwan remains disputed.Since the introduction of economic reforms in 1978, China's economy has been one of the world's fastest-growing with annual growth rates consistently above 6 percent. According to the World Bank, China's GDP grew from $150 billion in 1978 to $12.24 trillion by 2017. According to official data, China's GDP in 2018 was 90 trillion Yuan ($13.28 trillion). Since 2010, China has been the world's second-largest economy by nominal GDP and since 2014, the largest economy in the world by purchasing power parity (PPP). China is also the world's largest exporter and second-largest importer of goods. China is a recognized nuclear weapons state and has the world's largest standing army and second-largest defense budget. The PRC is a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council as it replaced the ROC in 1971, as well as an active global partner of ASEAN Plus mechanism. China is also a leading member of numerous formal and informal multilateral organizations, including the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO), WTO, APEC, BRICS, the BCIM, and the G20. China has been characterized as a potential superpower, mainly because of its massive population, economy, and military.\nThe Tower of San Martino della Battaglia is a monumental building erected in 1878, to commemorate the Battle of San Martino, a portion of the Battle of Solferino in 1859.The 74 meter high tower was constructed in the form of a Neo-Gothic turret, atop the hill of San Martino. Nearby is an Ossuary that collected the bodies of soldiers who died in the battle there between the Austrian and the Piedmontese army. The larger engagement, which also included French troops, led to the cession of Lombardy to the Kingdom of Sardinia (Piedmont). The Battle of Solferino took place near the villages of Solferino and San Martino della Battaglia in Lombardy, south of Lake Garda between Milan and Verona. The adjoint Battle of San Martino was fought north from Solferino, near the lakeshore, between San Martino and Pozzolengo villages. The architect was Giacomo Frizzoni of Bergamo, and engineers were Luigi Fattori of Solferino, Antonio Monterumici of Treviso, and Ducati Cavalieri of Bologna. At the hall at the base is a bronze statue of Vittorio Emanuele II sculpted by Antonio Dal Zotto. The walls have large frescoes by Vittorio Bressanin of Venice, but also Vincenzo De Stefani (born in Verona, March 6, 1859), Alberti Giuseppe Vizzotto of Oderzo, and Raffaello Pontremoli, with panels depicting events surrounding the battle. The tower can be ascended by a spiraling ramp. At the top of the tower there is a lookout panel highlighting important towns that can be viewed from that vantage point.The architecture seems to have been influenced by the Neoclassic marble tower built in the Cemetery of Brescia in 1815 by the architect Rodolfo Vantini; however, this monument in hewn stone projects a rustic gothic castle appearance.\nGuirgo, Boulkiemd\u00e9 is a town in the Sourgou Department of Boulkiemd\u00e9 Province in central western Burkina Faso. It has a population of 1,384.\nCryptoplax striata, commonly known as the Striate Leathery Chiton is a species of chiton in the cryptoplax genus that lives under rocks and in crevices in the intertidal and subtidal waters of southern Australia. It grows to 120 mm long and has a brown, leathery appearance with tiny non-articulated shell valves.\nAfrica is the world's second largest and second most-populous continent, being behind Asia in both categories. At about 30.3 million km2 (11.7 million square miles) including adjacent islands, it covers 6% of Earth's total surface area and 20% of its land area. With1.2 billion people as of 2016, it accounts for about 16% of the world's human population. The continent is surrounded by the Mediterranean Sea to the north, the Isthmus of Suez and the Red Sea to the northeast, the Indian Ocean to the southeast and the Atlantic Ocean to the west. The continent includes Madagascar and various archipelagos. It contains 54 fully recognised sovereign states (countries), nine territories and two de facto independent states with limited or no recognition. The majority of the continent and its countries are in the Northern Hemisphere, with a substantial portion and number of countries in the Southern Hemisphere.Africa's average population is the youngest amongst all the continents; the median age in 2012 was 19.7, when the worldwide median age was 30.4. Algeria is Africa's largest country by area, and Nigeria is its largest by population. Africa, particularly central Eastern Africa, is widely accepted as the place of origin of humans and the Hominidae clade (great apes), as evidenced by the discovery of the earliest hominids and their ancestors as well as later ones that have been dated to around 7 million years ago, including Sahelanthropus tchadensis, Australopithecus africanus, A. afarensis, Homo erectus, H. habilis and H. ergaster\u2014the earliest Homo sapiens (modern human), found in Ethiopia, date to circa 200,000 years ago. Africa straddles the equator and encompasses numerous climate areas; it is the only continent to stretch from the northern temperate to southern temperate zones.Africa hosts a large diversity of ethnicities, cultures and languages. In the late 19th century, European countries colonised almost all of Africa; most present states in Africa emerged from a process of decolonisation in the 20th century. African nations cooperate through the establishment of the African Union, which is headquartered in Addis Ababa.\nArvind Narayanan is a computer scientist and an associate professor at Princeton University. Narayanan is recognized for his research in the de-anonymization of data.\n", "path": ["guirgo, boulkiemde", "Burkina Faso", "Africa", "People's Republic of China"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the country location of origin of the continent of the country location of studenci (ljubuski)?", "correct_answer": "Sweden", "model_answer": " [/INST] Answer: Studenci is a village located in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which is a country in Southeastern Europe.\n\nExplanation: The context provided mentions Bosnia and Herzegovina several times as", "context": "Helen Marguerite Allan (30 August 1905 \u2013 29 January 1994) was a Russian-born British actress. Allan was born in August 1905 in Saint Petersburg, Russia before moving to the United Kingdom, where she married Kenneth Chapman in 1948. She died in Wokingham, Berkshire in January 1994 at the age of 88.\nEurope is a Swedish rock band formed in Upplands V\u00e4sby in 1979,  by vocalist Joey Tempest, guitarist John Norum, bassist Peter Olsson, and drummer Tony Reno. They got a major breakthrough in Sweden in 1982 by winning the televised competition \"Rock-SM\" (Swedish Rock Championships): it was the first time this competition was held, and Europe became a larger success than the competition itself.Since their formation, Europe has released eleven studio albums, three live albums, three compilations and twenty-four music videos.Europe rose to international fame in the 1980s with their third album, 1986's The Final Countdown, which has sold over 3 million copies in the United States and 15 million copies worldwide (including album and single). Europe have sold over 25 million records worldwide.  The band has had two top 20 albums on the Billboard 200 chart (The Final Countdown  and Out of This World) and three top 30 singles on the Billboard Hot 100 chart (\"The Final Countdown\", \"Rock the Night\" and \"Carrie\").Europe went on hiatus in 1992, reunited temporarily for a one-off performance in Stockholm on New Year's Eve 1999 and announced an official reunion in 2003. Since then the band has released six albums, Start from the Dark (2004), Secret Society (2006), Last Look at Eden (2009), Bag of Bones (2012), War of Kings (2015) and Walk the Earth (2017).Europe has achieved new attention in the US due to being featured in a GEICO Insurance cable television commercial campaign viewed for many months across the US in 2015\u201316.The band is mainly influenced by Whitesnake, Deep Purple, Rainbow, Led Zeppelin, Thin Lizzy, UFO and Michael Schenker Group.\nTwo human polls and one formulaic ranking make up the 2001 NCAA Division I-A football rankings. Unlike most sports, college football's governing body, the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA), does not bestow a National Championship title for Division I-A football. That title is primarily bestowed by different polling agencies. There are several polls that currently exist. The main weekly polls are the AP Poll and Coaches Poll. About halfway through the season the Bowl Championship Series (BCS) Standings are released.\nLookin At Lucky  (foaled May 27, 2007 in Kentucky) is an American Thoroughbred racehorse and winner of the 2010 Preakness Stakes. Sired by Smart Strike, a half brother to Canadian Triple Crown Winner Dance Smartly, his dam, Private Feeling, was sired by Belong To Me by the North American Leading Sire of 1993, Danzig.Lookin At Lucky proved to be the best three-year-old in training by winning the 2010 Eclipse Award as division champion being named American Champion Three-Year-Old Male Horse. He dominated the voting that year; Lookin At Lucky, 224 votes; Eskendereya, 5 votes; Paddy O'Prado, 1 vote. As the award was presented January 2011, it was announced that Lookin At Lucky had become the first horse in 32 years to be named the champion of his division at both age two and age three. No other horse had accomplished such a feat since Spectacular Bid did it 1978 and 1979.\nThe Shabwah campaign (March\u2013August 2015) was a campaign for control of the Shabwah Governorate of Yemen, between the Houthis and Yemen Army units loyal to Ali Abdullah Saleh on one side, and militiamen and Yemen Army units loyal to Abdrabbuh Mansur Hadi on the other side. The offensive have also launched during a previously started AQAP offensive.\nSweden (Swedish: Sverige [\u02c8sv\u00e6rj\u025b] (listen)), formal name: the Kingdom of Sweden (Swedish: Konungariket Sverige ), is a Scandinavian Nordic country in Northern Europe. It borders Norway to the west and north and Finland to the east, and is connected to Denmark in the southwest by a bridge-tunnel across the \u00d6resund, a strait at the Swedish-Danish border. At 450,295 square kilometres (173,860 sq mi), Sweden is the largest country in Northern Europe, the third-largest country in the European Union and the fifth largest country in Europe by area. Sweden has a total population of 10.3 million of which 2.5 million have a foreign background. It has a low population density of 22 inhabitants per square kilometre (57/sq mi). The highest concentration is in the central and southern half of the country.Sweden is part of the geographical area of Fennoscandia. The climate is in general very mild for its northerly latitude due to significant maritime influence. In spite of the high latitude, Sweden often has warm continental summers, being located in between the North Atlantic, the Baltic Sea and the vast Eurasian Russian landmass. The general climate and environment varies significantly from the south and north due to the vast latitudal difference and much of Sweden has reliably cold and snowy winters. It also has a vast coastline with many offshore islands, many lakes, a large proportion of the country covered by forests and includes a portion of the Scandinavian Mountains.Germanic peoples have inhabited Sweden since prehistoric times, emerging into history as the Geats (Swedish G\u00f6tar) and Swedes (Svear) and constituting the sea peoples known as the Norsemen. Southern Sweden is predominantly agricultural, while the north is heavily forested.  Today,  the sovereign state of Sweden is a constitutional monarchy and parliamentary democracy, with a monarch as head of state, like its neighbour Norway. The capital city is Stockholm, which is also the most populous city in the country. Legislative power is vested in the 349-member unicameral Riksdag. Executive power is exercised by the government chaired by the prime minister. Sweden is a unitary state, currently divided into 21 counties and 290 municipalities.An independent Swedish state emerged during the early 12th century. After the Black Death in the middle of the 14th century killed about a third of the Scandinavian population, the Hanseatic League threatened Scandinavia's culture, finances and languages. This led to the forming of the Scandinavian Kalmar Union in 1397, which Sweden left in 1523. When Sweden became involved in the Thirty Years War on the Reformist side, an expansion of its territories began and eventually the Swedish Empire was formed. This became one of the great powers of Europe until the early 18th century. Swedish territories outside the Scandinavian Peninsula were gradually lost during the 18th and 19th centuries, ending with the annexation of present-day Finland by Russia in 1809. The last war in which Sweden was directly involved was in 1814, when Norway was militarily forced into personal union. Since then, Sweden has been at peace, maintaining an official policy of neutrality in foreign affairs. The union with Norway was peacefully dissolved in 1905. Sweden was formally neutral through both world wars and the Cold War, albeit Sweden has since 2009 openly moved towards cooperation with NATO. Sweden has close relations to its Nordic neighbours, including linguistically, with the Swedish language being an official language in Finland and Swedish also being mutually intelligible with Danish and Norwegian.After the end of the Cold War, Sweden joined the European Union (EU) on 1 January 1995, but declined NATO membership, as well as Eurozone (EZ) membership following a referendum. It is also a member of the United Nations, the Nordic Council, the Council of Europe, the World Trade Organization and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). Sweden maintains a Nordic social welfare system that provides universal health care and tertiary education for its citizens. It has the world's eleventh-highest per capita income and ranks highly in numerous metrics of national performance, including quality of life, health, education, protection of civil liberties, economic competitiveness, equality, prosperity and human development.\nBosnia and Herzegovina, abbreviated BiH or B&H, sometimes called Bosnia\u2013Herzegovina and often known informally as Bosnia, is a country in Southeastern Europe, located within the Balkan Peninsula. Sarajevo is the capital and largest city.Bosnia and Herzegovina is an almost landlocked country \u2013 it has a narrow coast at the Adriatic Sea, about 20 kilometres (12 miles) long surrounding the town of Neum. It is bordered by Croatia to the north, west and south; Serbia to the east; and Montenegro to the southeast. In the central and eastern interior of the country the geography is mountainous, in the northwest it is moderately hilly, and the northeast is predominantly flatland. The inland, Bosnia, is a geographically larger region and has a moderate continental climate, with hot summers and cold and snowy winters. The southern tip, Herzegovina, has a Mediterranean climate and plain topography.Bosnia and Herzegovina traces permanent human settlement back to the Neolithic age, during and after which it was populated by several Illyrian and Celtic civilizations. Culturally, politically, and socially, the country has a rich history, having been first settled by the Slavic peoples that populate the area today from the 6th through to the 9th centuries. In the 12th century the Banate of Bosnia was established, which evolved into the Kingdom of Bosnia in the 14th century, after which it was annexed into the Ottoman Empire, under whose rule it remained from the mid-15th to the late 19th centuries. The Ottomans brought Islam to the region, and altered much of the cultural and social outlook of the country. This was followed by annexation into the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy, which lasted up until World War I. In the interwar period, Bosnia and Herzegovina was part of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia and after World War II, it was granted full republic status in the newly formed Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. Following the dissolution of Yugoslavia, the republic proclaimed independence in 1992, which was followed by the Bosnian War, lasting until late 1995.Tourism in Bosnia and Herzegovina has grown at double digit rates in recent years. Bosnia and Herzegovina is regionally and internationally renowned for its natural environment and cultural heritage inherited from six historical civilizations, its cuisine, winter sports, its eclectic and unique music, architecture, and its festivals, some of which are the largest and most prominent of their kind in Southeastern Europe. The country is home to three main ethnic groups or, officially, constituent peoples, as specified in the constitution. Bosniaks are the largest group of the three, with Serbs second, and Croats third. A native of Bosnia and Herzegovina, regardless of ethnicity, is usually identified in English as a Bosnian. Minorities, defined under the constitutional nomenclature \"Others\", include Jews, Roma, Poles, Ukrainians, and Turks. Bosnia and Herzegovina has a bicameral legislature and a three-member Presidency composed of a member of each major ethnic group. However, the central government's power is highly limited, as the country is largely decentralized and comprises two autonomous entities: the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina and Republika Srpska, with a third unit, the Br\u010dko District, governed under local government. The Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina consists of 10 cantons.Bosnia and Herzegovina ranks highly in terms of human development, and has an economy dominated by the industry and agriculture sectors, followed by the tourism and service sectors. The country has a social security and universal healthcare system, and primary- and secondary-level education is tuition-free. It is a member of the UN, OSCE, Council of Europe, PfP, CEFTA, and a founding member of the Union for the Mediterranean upon its establishment in July 2008. The country is an applicant for membership to the European Union and has been a candidate for NATO membership since April 2010, when it received a Membership Action Plan.\nStudenci (Ljubu\u0161ki) is a village in Bosnia and Herzegovina. According to the 1991 census, the village is located in the municipality of Ljubu\u0161ki.History of StudenciIn Bosnia and Herzegowina.Or in the 17th sencury, Hungary. A brave man,that his name shall not be spoken...(Zdenko Nik\u0161e).One morning in April 7th 1775 Zdenko Nik\u0161e was on his throne in Wallachia, he got news about Hungary troops making their way to his land. But Zdenko and his companion Mario Vidi\u0107, have started going to Hungary.April 8th 1775 they are near Camp of Studenci. Camp Studenci was larger than any other camp in Hungary...Zdenko has made his throne in there and started louring Hungarys soldiers in there, he would slaughter them and made them his soldiers.He slaughterd many of good men...By the dawn of April 9th 1775 Zdenko made his first country inside Hungary...He named the country(STUDENCI).He has ruled that country for many years but, one day of March 11th 1780. A man named Mario Vidic, his companion and a general of STUDENCI had killed Zdenko...From that day on Studenci has started falling on its knees...No more of a great country,now 2018 Studenci is just a village in BiH...Written by Ivan Jurkovic\n", "path": ["studenci (ljubuski)", "Bosnia and Herzegovina", "Europe", "Sweden"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the discoverer or inventor of the instrument of katja andy?", "correct_answer": "Bartolomeo Cristofori", "model_answer": " [/INST] The piano is an instrument discovered and invented by Bartolomeo Cristofori in Italy around 1700, not Katja Andy. Katja Andy was a German-American classical pianist and piano professor. The name \"piano", "context": "The Robert Guertin Centre (formerly Robert Guertin Arena and Hull Arena) is a multi-purpose arena in the Hull sector of Gatineau, Quebec, with a capacity of 4,000 capacity (3,196 seated). It was built in 1957 and is home to the Gatineau Olympiques of the Quebec Major Junior Hockey League.The original tenant hockey team was the Ottawa-Hull Canadiens from 1957 to 1961, until the team relocated to become the Montreal Junior Canadiens. The Ottawa-Hull Canadiens hosted the 1958 Memorial Cup between the Hull Arena and the Ottawa Auditorium across the river. The Canadiens defeated the Regina Pats four games to two to win the Memorial Cup. The Hull Arena hosted various teams in the Ottawa-Hull District Junior Hockey League during the 1960s, and briefly hosted the Ottawa 67's in 1967 and 1968, while the Ottawa Civic Centre was under construction. Since 1973, the arena has been home to Quebec Major Junior Hockey League teams. The Hull Festivals joined the QMJHL in 1973, and later became known as the Hull Olympiques in 1976, and finally the Gatineau Olympiques in 2003.The Hull arena hosted the 1982 Memorial Cup. The Gatineau Olympiques won the 1997 Memorial Cup on home ice, defeating the Lethbridge Hurricanes. The arena is also the site of an international midget hockey tournament held every January.\nKatja Andy (born K\u00e4the Aschaffenburg; 23 May 1907 \u2013 30 December 2013) was a German-American classical pianist and piano professor.\nThe Aircraft Warning Service (AWS) was a civilian service of the United States Army Ground Observer Corps instated during World War II to keep watch for enemy planes entering American airspace. It became inactive on May 29, 1944.\nRissoa alleryi is a species of minute sea snail, a marine gastropod mollusk or micromollusk in the family Rissoidae.\nThe piano is an acoustic, stringed musical instrument invented in Italy by Bartolomeo Cristofori around the year 1700 (the exact year is uncertain), in which the strings are struck by hammers. It is played using a keyboard, which is a row of keys (small levers) that the performer presses down or strikes with the fingers and thumbs of both hands to cause the hammers to strike the strings. The word piano is a shortened form of pianoforte, the Italian term for the early 1700s versions of the instrument,  which in turn derives from gravicembalo col piano e forte and fortepiano. The Italian musical terms piano and forte indicate \"soft\" and \"loud\" respectively, in this context referring to the variations in volume (i.e., loudness) produced in response to a pianist's touch or pressure on the keys: the greater the velocity of a key press, the greater the force of the hammer hitting the strings, and the louder the sound of the note produced and the stronger the attack. The name was created as a contrast to harpsichord, a musical instrument that does not allow variation in volume. The first fortepianos in the 1700s had a quieter sound and smaller dynamic range.An acoustic piano usually has a protective wooden case surrounding the soundboard and metal strings, which are strung under great tension on a heavy metal frame. Pressing one or more keys on the piano's keyboard causes a padded hammer (typically padded with firm felt) to strike the strings. The hammer rebounds from the strings, and the strings continue to vibrate at their resonant frequency. These vibrations are transmitted through a bridge to a soundboard that amplifies by more efficiently coupling the acoustic energy to the air. When the key is released, a damper stops the strings' vibration, ending the sound. Notes can be sustained, even when the keys are released by the fingers and thumbs, by the use of pedals at the base of the instrument. The sustain pedal enables pianists to play musical passages that would otherwise be impossible, such as sounding a 10-note chord in the lower register and then, while this chord is being continued with the sustain pedal, shifting both hands to the treble range to play a melody and arpeggios over the top of this sustained chord. Unlike the pipe organ and harpsichord, two major keyboard instruments widely used before the piano, the piano allows gradations of volume and tone according to how forcefully a performer presses or strikes the keys.Most modern pianos have a row of 88 black and white keys, 52 white keys for the notes of the C major scale (C, D, E, F, G, A and B) and 36 shorter black keys, which are raised above the white keys, and set further back on the keyboard. This means that the piano can play 88 different pitches (or \"notes\"), going from the deepest bass range to the highest treble. The black keys are for the \"accidentals\" (F\u266f/G\u266d, G\u266f/A\u266d, A\u266f/B\u266d, C\u266f/D\u266d, and D\u266f/E\u266d), which are needed to play in all twelve keys. More rarely, some pianos have additional keys (which require additional strings). Most notes have three strings, except for the bass, which graduates from one to two. The strings are sounded when keys are pressed or struck, and silenced by dampers when the hands are lifted from the keyboard. Although an acoustic piano has strings, it is usually classified as a percussion instrument rather than as a stringed instrument, because the strings are struck rather than plucked (as with a harpsichord or spinet); in the Hornbostel\u2013Sachs system of instrument classification, pianos are considered chordophones. There are two main types of piano: the grand piano and the upright piano. The grand piano is used for Classical solos, chamber music, and art song, and it is often used in jazz and pop concerts. The upright piano, which is more compact, is the most popular type, as it is a better size for use in private homes for domestic music-making and practice.During the 1800s, influenced by the musical trends of the Romantic music era, innovations such as the cast iron frame (which allowed much greater string tensions) and aliquot stringing gave grand pianos a more powerful sound, with a longer sustain and richer tone. In the nineteenth century, a family's piano played the same role that a radio or phonograph played in the twentieth century; when a nineteenth-century family wanted to hear a newly published musical piece or symphony, they could hear it by having a family member play it on the piano. During the nineteenth century, music publishers produced many musical works in arrangements for piano, so that music lovers could play and hear the popular pieces of the day in their home. The piano is widely employed in classical, jazz, traditional and popular music for solo and ensemble performances, accompaniment, and for composing, songwriting and rehearsals. Although the piano is very heavy and thus not portable and is expensive (in comparison with other widely used accompaniment instruments, such as the acoustic guitar), its musical versatility (i.e., its wide pitch range, ability to play chords, louder or softer notes and two or more independent musical lines at the same time), the large number of musicians and amateurs trained in playing it, and its wide availability in performance venues, schools and rehearsal spaces have made it one of the Western world's most familiar musical instruments. With technological advances, amplified electric pianos (1929), electronic pianos (1970s), and digital pianos (1980s) have also been developed. The electric piano became a popular instrument in the 1960s and 1970s genres of jazz fusion, funk music and rock music.\nBartolomeo Cristofori di Francesco (Italian pronunciation: [bartolo\u02c8m\u025b\u02d0o kri\u02c8st\u0254\u02d0fori di fran\u02c8t\u0283esko]; May 4, 1655 \u2013 January 27, 1731) was an Italian maker of musical instruments famous for inventing the piano.\nJacobsonia is a genus of fungi in the family Helotiaceae. This is a monotypic genus, containing the single species Jacobsonia glauca.\n", "path": ["katja andy", "piano", "Bartolomeo Cristofori"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the diplomatic relation of the continent of the country location of abakuasimbo?", "correct_answer": "People's Republic of China", "model_answer": " [/INST] The continent where Abakuasimbo is located is Africa. Africa is a continent with 54 fully recognized sovereign states (countries), nine territories, and two de facto independent states with limited or no recognition. The diplomatic", "context": "Africa is the world's second largest and second most-populous continent, being behind Asia in both categories. At about 30.3 million km2 (11.7 million square miles) including adjacent islands, it covers 6% of Earth's total surface area and 20% of its land area. With1.2 billion people as of 2016, it accounts for about 16% of the world's human population. The continent is surrounded by the Mediterranean Sea to the north, the Isthmus of Suez and the Red Sea to the northeast, the Indian Ocean to the southeast and the Atlantic Ocean to the west. The continent includes Madagascar and various archipelagos. It contains 54 fully recognised sovereign states (countries), nine territories and two de facto independent states with limited or no recognition. The majority of the continent and its countries are in the Northern Hemisphere, with a substantial portion and number of countries in the Southern Hemisphere.Africa's average population is the youngest amongst all the continents; the median age in 2012 was 19.7, when the worldwide median age was 30.4. Algeria is Africa's largest country by area, and Nigeria is its largest by population. Africa, particularly central Eastern Africa, is widely accepted as the place of origin of humans and the Hominidae clade (great apes), as evidenced by the discovery of the earliest hominids and their ancestors as well as later ones that have been dated to around 7 million years ago, including Sahelanthropus tchadensis, Australopithecus africanus, A. afarensis, Homo erectus, H. habilis and H. ergaster\u2014the earliest Homo sapiens (modern human), found in Ethiopia, date to circa 200,000 years ago. Africa straddles the equator and encompasses numerous climate areas; it is the only continent to stretch from the northern temperate to southern temperate zones.Africa hosts a large diversity of ethnicities, cultures and languages. In the late 19th century, European countries colonised almost all of Africa; most present states in Africa emerged from a process of decolonisation in the 20th century. African nations cooperate through the establishment of the African Union, which is headquartered in Addis Ababa.\nAbakuasimbo is a village in North Kivu in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is connected by road to Mbunia in the southeast.\nLofty Promenade (77\u00b031\u2032S 168\u00b052\u2032E) is an inclined glacial course, 7 nautical miles (13 km) long and 1 nautical mile (2 km) wide, in the eastern part of Ross Island, Antarctica. The feature is partly framed between the southern elements of the Kyle Hills and Guardrail Ridge, as it descends east-southeast from 2,600 metres (8,500 ft) near Mount Terror to 200 metres (660 ft) near the Allen Rocks. The glacial surface is relatively smooth and affords an unobstructed route between the Cape Crozier area and Mount Terror. The name, given by the Advisory Committee on Antarctic Names in 2000, is allusive and refers to a public place for taking a leisurely walk.\nThe Democratic Republic of the Congo (pronunciation  French: R\u00e9publique d\u00e9mocratique du Congo [k\u0254\u0303\u0261o]), also known as DR Congo, the DRC, DROC, Congo-Kinshasa, East Congo, or simply the Congo, is a country located in Central Africa. It is sometimes anachronistically referred to by its former name of Zaire, which was its official name between 1971 and 1997. It is, by area, the largest country in sub-Saharan Africa, the second-largest in all of Africa (after Algeria), and the 11th-largest in the world. With a population of over 78 million, the Democratic Republic of the Congo is the most populous officially Francophone country, the fourth-most-populous country in Africa, and the 16th-most-populous country in the world. Eastern DR Congo has been the scene of ongoing military conflict in Kivu, since 2015.Centred on the Congo Basin, the territory of the DRC was first inhabited by Central African foragers around 90,000 years ago and was reached by the Bantu expansion about 3,000 years ago. In the west, the Kingdom of Kongo ruled around the mouth of the Congo River from the 14th to 19th centuries. In the centre and east, the kingdoms of Luba and Lunda ruled from the 16th and 17th centuries to the 19th century. In the 1870s, just before the onset of the Scramble for Africa, European exploration of the Congo Basin was carried out, first led by Henry Morton Stanley under the sponsorship of Leopold II of Belgium. Leopold formally acquired rights to the Congo territory at the Berlin Conference in 1885 and made the land his private property, naming it the Congo Free State. During the Free State, his colonial military unit, the Force Publique, forced the local population to produce rubber. From 1885 to 1908, millions of the Kongo people died as a consequence of disease and exploitation. In 1908, Belgium, despite initial reluctance, formally annexed the Free State, which became known as the Belgian Congo.The Belgian Congo achieved independence on 30 June 1960 under the name Republic of the Congo. Congolese nationalist Patrice Lumumba was elected the first Prime Minister, while Joseph Kasa-Vubu became the first President. Conflict arose over the administration of the territory, which became known as the Congo Crisis. The provinces of Katanga, under Mo\u00efse Tshombe, and South Kasai attempted to secede. After Lumumba turned to the Soviet Union for assistance in the crisis, the U.S. and Belgium became wary and oversaw his removal from office by Kasa-Vubu on 5 September and ultimate execution by Belgian-led Katangese troops on 17 January 1961. On 25 November 1965, Army Chief of Staff Joseph-D\u00e9sir\u00e9 Mobutu, who later renamed himself Mobutu Sese Seko, officially came into power through a coup d'\u00e9tat. In 1971, he renamed the country Zaire. The country was run as a dictatorial one-party state, with his Popular Movement of the Revolution as the sole legal party. Mobutu's government received considerable support from the United States, due to its anti-communist stance during the Cold War. By the early 1990s, Mobutu's government began to weaken. Destabilisation in the east resulting from the 1994 Rwandan genocide and disenfranchisement among the eastern Banyamulenge (Congolese Tutsi) population led to a 1996 invasion led by Tutsi FPR-ruled Rwanda, which began the First Congo War.On 17 May 1997, Laurent-D\u00e9sir\u00e9 Kabila, a leader of Tutsi forces from the province of South Kivu, became President after Mobutu fled to Morocco, reverting the country's name to the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Tensions between President Kabila and the Rwandan and Tutsi presence in the country led to the Second Congo War from 1998 to 2003. Ultimately, nine African countries and around twenty armed groups became involved in the war, which resulted in the deaths of 5.4 million people. The two wars devastated the country. President Laurent-D\u00e9sir\u00e9 Kabila was assassinated by one of his bodyguards on 16 January 2001 and was succeeded eight days later as President by his son Joseph.The Democratic Republic of the Congo is extremely rich in natural resources but has had political instability, a lack of infrastructure, issues with corruption and centuries of both commercial and colonial extraction and exploitation with little holistic development. Besides the capital Kinshasa, the two next largest cities Lubumbashi and Mbuji-Mayi are both mining communities. DR Congo's largest export is raw minerals, with China accepting over 50% of DRC's exports in 2012. In 2016, DR Congo's level of human development was ranked 176th out of 187 countries by the Human Development Index. As of 2018, around 600,000 Congolese have fled to neighbouring countries from conflicts in the centre and east of the DRC. Two million children risk starvation, and the fighting has displaced 4.5 million people. The sovereign state is a member of the United Nations, Non-Aligned Movement, African Union, and COMESA.\nChina (Chinese: \u4e2d\u56fd; pinyin: Zh\u014dnggu\u00f3; lit. \"Middle Kingdom\"), officially the People's Republic of China (PRC), is a country in East Asia and the world's most populous country, with a population of around 1.404 billion. Covering approximately 9,600,000 square kilometers (3,700,000 sq mi), it is the fourth largest country by total area. Governed by the Communist Party of China, the state exercises jurisdiction over 22 provinces, five autonomous regions, four direct-controlled municipalities (Beijing, Tianjin, Shanghai, and Chongqing), and the special administrative regions of Hong Kong and Macau.China emerged as one of the world's earliest civilizations, in the fertile basin of the Yellow River in the North China Plain. For millennia, China's political system was based on hereditary monarchies, or dynasties, beginning with the semi-legendary Xia dynasty in 21st century BCE. Since then, China has expanded, fractured, and re-unified numerous times. In the 3rd century BCE, the Qin reunited core China and established the first Chinese empire. The succeeding Han dynasty, which ruled from 206 BC until 220 AD, saw some of the most advanced technology at that time, including papermaking and the compass, along with agricultural and medical improvements. The invention of gunpowder and movable type in the Tang dynasty (618\u2013907) and Northern Song (960\u20131127) completed the Four Great Inventions. Tang culture spread widely in Asia, as the new Silk Route brought traders to as far as Mesopotamia and the Horn of Africa. Dynastic rule ended in 1912 with the Xinhai Revolution, when the republic replaced the Qing dynasty. China as a whole was ravaged by Japan during World War II, and the subsequent Chinese Civil War resulted in a division of territory in 1949, when the Communist Party of China established the People's Republic of China, a unitary one-party sovereign state on the majority of China, while the Kuomintang-led nationalist government retreated to the island of Taiwan. The political status of Taiwan remains disputed.Since the introduction of economic reforms in 1978, China's economy has been one of the world's fastest-growing with annual growth rates consistently above 6 percent. According to the World Bank, China's GDP grew from $150 billion in 1978 to $12.24 trillion by 2017. According to official data, China's GDP in 2018 was 90 trillion Yuan ($13.28 trillion). Since 2010, China has been the world's second-largest economy by nominal GDP and since 2014, the largest economy in the world by purchasing power parity (PPP). China is also the world's largest exporter and second-largest importer of goods. China is a recognized nuclear weapons state and has the world's largest standing army and second-largest defense budget. The PRC is a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council as it replaced the ROC in 1971, as well as an active global partner of ASEAN Plus mechanism. China is also a leading member of numerous formal and informal multilateral organizations, including the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO), WTO, APEC, BRICS, the BCIM, and the G20. China has been characterized as a potential superpower, mainly because of its massive population, economy, and military.\n\"Lesbian Request Denied\" is the third episode of the first season of American comedy-drama series Orange Is the New Black (OITNB), based on Piper Kerman's memoir, Orange Is the New Black: My Year in a Women's Prison (2010), regarding her time at FCI Danbury, a minimum-security federal prison. It was written by Sian Heder, and is one of two OITNB episodes directed by actress and director Jodie Foster. The episode was originally released, simultaneously with twelve other episodes making up the first season, on American streaming service Netflix on July 11, 2013.The episode focuses on Sophia Burset (portrayed by Laverne Cox), a transgender inmate at the fictional prison Litchfield Penitentiary. In flashbacks, Sophia's family adjusts to her transition, while Sophia is arrested for committing credit card fraud to pay for her sex reassignment surgery. In present day, Sophia fights back against the prison reducing her dosage of exogenous estrogen due to budget cuts. In a subplot, new inmate Piper Chapman, played by Taylor Schilling, deals with the romantic overtures of a mentally unstable inmate, Suzanne \"Crazy Eyes\" Warren, portrayed by Uzo Aduba.\"Lesbian Request Denied\" received widespread critical acclaim from critics, who praised the episode for the performances of Cox and Aduba, and for its respectful and nuanced treatment of a transgender character, especially in comparison to television's treatment of the transgender community in the past. For the episode, Aduba and Cox both received nominations for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Comedy Series, the former winning the award, while Foster was nominated for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Directing for a Comedy Series. Cox was the first (and to date, only) transgender actor to be nominated for an acting award at the Emmys.\nAustin Eldon Knowlton (July 23, 1909 \u2013 June 25, 2003) was trained as an architect but spent most of his career in the construction industry.  His company designed, financed and built more than 160 college and university buildings on every major college campus in Ohio and more than 200 elementary and secondary school buildings.  His companies have also constructed more than 35 major hospitals and 43 United States Post Offices throughout the country.  In his lifetime, he designed more than 600 buildings.A. E. Knowlton was born in Athens, Ohio in 1909, the second child of Clarence Luster Knowlton (\"CL\") and Vertura Mae Cundiff.  His father had founded Knowlton Brothers Construction in 1906 with his brother Everett and had been in the construction business in Athens, Ohio.  About 1917, they were awarded the contract to build the Mary Rutan Hospital in Bellefontaine, Ohio and both brothers relocated to Bellefontaine and made it their home.  The brothers separated their business about 1923, at which time \"CL\" formed his new company, C. L. Knowlton and Sons, Contractors, with sons Clarence Ernest (\"CE\") and Austin Eldon (\"AE\").Eldon Knowlton grew up in Bellefontine, played football in high school and gained the nickname \"Dutch.\"  He was graduated from Bellefontaine High School in 1927 and then attended The Ohio State University where one of his favorite professors was Howard Dwight Smith.  He was a member of Alpha Rho Chi fraternity.  Dutch was graduated with a Bachelor of Science in Architecture, class of 1931.  He rejoined his father's firm after graduation.  After his father's retirement from the business, \"AE\" and \"CE\" founded the Knowlton Construction Company in 1937.  Although Dutch suffered from dyslexia, he could add long columns of numbers in his head, and used a slide rule to calculate construction bids.A. E. \"Dutch\" Knowlton's company specialized in educational, health care and commercial buildings.  At his alma mater alone, he designed the Fawcett Center, Hitchcock Hall, Houck House, Jones Graduate Tower, the School of Allied Medical Professions, Wilce Health Center, Drake Union and Larkins Hall addition (the latter demolished 2005 to make way for a new Recreation and Physical Activities Center).In 1994 The Ohio State University renamed its School of Architecture the \"Austin E. Knowlton School of Architecture.\"  University President E. Gordon Gee praised the gift from Knowlton that made it possible for OSU to provide the finest architectural education possible.  A new building designed by the firm of Mack Scogin Merrill Elam Architects of Atlanta, Georgia, Knowlton Hall, opened for the School of Architecture in the fall of 2004.  In 1995, Ohio State presented an Honorary Doctorate of Architecture to A. E. Knowlton.Austin Eldon Knowlton married Phyllis Yvonne Coulon of Bowling Green, Ohio, in August 1933 in Wilmette, Illinois.  They had three children.  He was divorced from Phyllis in 1974 and later married and divorced Susan J. Dlott.  He resided in Bowling Green and Hamilton, Ohio before building a home on his Emerald Farms in Delaware County, Ohio in 1947.  In later life he spent winters in Fort Lauderdale, Florida until he donated his Delaware estate in 2001 to Augustana College and took up Florida residence full-time.An enthusiastic sportsman, he raised championship American Saddlebred horses at Emerald Farms (colors: emerald and blue), which he showed under harness and his family under saddle for many years all over the midwest.  In addition to show horses, he raced thoroughbreds and had an avid interest in baseball and football.  He was a Trustee of the Little Brown Jug Society which runs the Triple Crown of Harness Racing for Pacers in Delaware, Ohio.  He was a minority owner of the Cincinnati Reds in the 1970s, and was instrumental in building Riverfront Stadium.  With Paul Brown, he co-founded the Cincinnati Bengals and was the largest shareholder and Chairman of the Board for twenty years.  His Austin E. Knowlton Foundation has made many charitable gifts including funding the Knowlton Library of the Logan County District Library in memory of his parents and to The Ohio State University.\nVulcan (Romanian pronunciation: [vul\u02c8kan]; formerly Jiu-Vaidei-Vulcan; Hungarian: Vulk\u00e1n, Zsilyvajdejvulk\u00e1n (Zsily-Vajdej-Vulk\u00e1n); German: Wolkendorf, Wulkan) is a city in Hunedoara County, Romania. With a population of 22,906, it is the second-largest city in the Jiu Valley. It administers two villages, Dealul Babii (\"Old Woman's Hill\" in Romanian; Hegyvulk\u00e1n) and Jiu-Paro\u0219eni (Zsilymacesdparoseny).The city is named after the Vulcan Pass that connects the Jiu Valley to Oltenia, itself being derived from Slavic \"vlk\", meaning \"wolf\" (even if \"vulcan\" means \"volcano\" in Romanian).The coal resources of the region were discovered in 1788 while the Austrian General Landau defended Vulcan from the Ottoman Turks. One night the soldiers could not put out the camp fire they made, as the piles of coal underneath had caught fire. General Landau thought that he could stop the Turks without a fight by setting piles of coal on fire. The Turks noted the large numbers of fires on the heights and thought that the Austrian army was much larger than theirs and retreated.In 1850, the first mine was set up by the Hoffman brothers of Bra\u0219ov.\n", "path": ["abakuasimbo", "Democratic Republic of the Congo", "Africa", "People's Republic of China"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the indigenous to of the official language of the country location of citizenship of jane summerhays?", "correct_answer": "England", "model_answer": " [/INST] The official language of the country where Jane Summerhays is from is English.\n\nExplanation:\nJane Summerhays is an American actress. America is a country primarily located in North America with English as its official language. English", "context": "Elektroprivreda Republike Srpske (Serbian Cyrillic: \u0415\u043b\u0435\u043a\u0442\u0440\u043e\u043f\u0440\u0438\u0432\u0440\u0435\u0434\u0430 \u0420\u0435\u043f\u0443\u0431\u043b\u0438\u043a\u0435 \u0421\u0440\u043f\u0441\u043a\u0435) or Elektroprivreda RS, is a Bosnian state-owned integrated power company with headquarters in Trebinje, Republika Srpska.It is the largest employer in Republika Srpska and second-largest power utility in Bosnia and Herzegovina (after Elektroprivreda Bosne i Hercegovine).\nThe United States of America (USA), commonly known as the United States (U.S. or US) or America, is a country comprising 50 states, a federal district, five major self-governing territories, and various possessions. At 3.8 million sq mi (9.8 million km2), the United States is the world's third or fourth largest country by total area and is slightly smaller than the entire continent of Europe's 3.93 million sq mi (10.2 million km2). With a population of more than 327 million people, the U.S. is the third most populous country. Most of the country is located contiguously in North America between Canada and Mexico. The extremely diverse geography, climate, and wildlife of the United States make it one of the world's 17 megadiverse countries.Paleo-Indians migrated from Siberia to the North American mainland at least 12,000 years ago. European colonization began in the 16th century. The United States emerged from the thirteen British colonies established along the East Coast. Following the French and Indian War, numerous disputes between Great Britain and the colonies led to the American Revolution, which began in 1775, and the subsequent Declaration of Independence in 1776. The war ended in 1783 with the United States becoming the first country to gain independence from a European power. The current constitution was adopted in 1788, with the first ten amendments, collectively named the Bill of Rights, being ratified in 1791 to guarantee many fundamental civil liberties. The United States embarked on a vigorous expansion across North America throughout the 19th century, acquiring new territories, displacing Native American tribes, and gradually admitting new states until it spanned the continent by 1848.During the second half of the 19th century, the Civil War led to the abolition of slavery. By the end of the century, the United States had extended into the Pacific Ocean, and its economy, driven in large part by the Industrial Revolution, began to soar. The Spanish\u2013American War and World War I confirmed the country's status as a global military power. The United States emerged from World War II as a global superpower and a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council. The end of the Cold War and the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 left the United States as the world's sole superpower.The United States is a federal republic and a representative democracy. It is a founding member of the United Nations, World Bank, International Monetary Fund, Organization of American States (OAS), and many other international organizations. The United States is a highly developed country, with the world's largest economy by nominal GDP and second-largest economy by PPP, accounting for approximately a quarter of global GDP. The U.S. economy is largely post-industrial, characterized by the dominance of services and knowledge-based activities, although the manufacturing sector remains the second-largest in the world. The United States is the world's largest importer and the second largest exporter of goods, by value. Although its population is only 4.3% of the world total, the U.S. holds 31% of the total wealth in the world, the largest share of global wealth concentrated in a single country.Despite income and wealth disparities, the United States continues to rank very high in measures of socioeconomic performance, including average wage, human development, per capita GDP, and worker productivity. The United States is the foremost military power in the world, making up a third of global military spending, and is a leading political, cultural, and scientific force internationally.\nThe SP-68 is a highway in the southeeastern part of the state of S\u00e3o Paulo in Brazil.  The highway name is the Rodovia Dos Tropeiros and runs from Cachoeira Paulista at the 37th km of Via Dutra to the state of Rio de Janeiro.\nEnglish is a West Germanic language that was first spoken in early medieval England and eventually became a global lingua franca. It is named after the Angles, one of the Germanic tribes that migrated to the area of Great Britain that later took their name, as England. Both names derive from Anglia, a peninsula in the Baltic Sea. The language is closely related to Frisian and Low Saxon, and its vocabulary has been significantly influenced by other Germanic languages, particularly Norse (a North Germanic language), and to a greater extent by Latin and French.English has developed over the course of more than 1,400 years. The earliest forms of English, a group of West Germanic (Ingvaeonic) dialects brought to Great Britain by Anglo-Saxon settlers in the 5th century, are collectively called Old English. Middle English began in the late 11th century with the Norman conquest of England; this was a period in which the language was influenced by French. Early Modern English began in the late 15th century with the introduction of the printing press to London, the printing of the King James Bible and the start of the Great Vowel Shift.Through the worldwide influence of the British Empire, and later the United States, Modern English has been spreading around the world since the 17th century. Through all types of printed and electronic media, and spurred by the emergence of the United States as a global superpower, English has become the leading language of international discourse and the lingua franca in many regions and professional contexts such as science, navigation and law.English is the largest language by number of speakers, and the third most-spoken native language in the world, after Standard Chinese and Spanish. It is the most widely learned second language and is either the official language or one of the official languages in almost 60 sovereign states. There are more people who have learned it as a second language than there are native speakers. It is estimated that there are over 2 billion speakers of English. English is the most commonly spoken language in the United Kingdom, the United States, Canada, Australia, Ireland and New Zealand, and it is widely spoken in some areas of the Caribbean, Africa and South Asia. It is a co-official language of the United Nations, the European Union and many other world and regional international organisations. It is the most widely spoken Germanic language, accounting for at least 70% of speakers of this Indo-European branch. English has a vast vocabulary, though counting how many words any language has is impossible. English speakers are called \"Anglophones\".Modern English grammar is the result of a gradual change from a typical Indo-European dependent marking pattern, with a rich inflectional morphology and relatively free word order, to a mostly analytic pattern with little inflection, a fairly fixed SVO word order and a complex syntax. Modern English relies more on auxiliary verbs and word order for the expression of complex tenses, aspect and mood, as well as passive constructions, interrogatives and some negation. The variation among the accents and dialects of English used in different countries and regions\u2014in terms of phonetics and phonology, and sometimes also vocabulary, grammar, and spelling\u2014can often be understood by speakers of different dialects, but in extreme cases can lead to confusion or even mutual unintelligibility between English speakers.\nJane Summerhays (born October 11, 1944 in Salt Lake City, Utah) is an American actress known for her work on stage, screen, and film. Her television credits include guest roles on One Life to Live, All My Children, Tales from the Darkside, Working It Out, The Cosby Mysteries, New York News, Law & Order, Sex and the City, and Ed. Summerhays has also appeared in the 2001 film This Train in the role of Love and the 2005 film Backseat as the mother.Summerhays is probably best known for her stage work. She first appeared as a member of the ensemble in the national tour of Nash at Nine in 1975. She next performed in the original 1976 Laurence Olivier Award winning London production of A Chorus Line as Sheila at the Drury Lane Theatre. In 1978, Summerhays was cast as Lady Kay Wellington in the national touring production of Oh, Kay! which included performances at the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts. She then reprised the role the following year at the Royal Alexandra Theatre in Toronto. Later that year Summerhays made her Broadway debut, replacing Kelly Bishop, who originated the part on Broadway, as Sheila in A Chorus Line. In 1979, she played the role of Jane in the Broadway production of Sugar Babies, replacing actress Ann Jillian who originated the part. Summerhays also was the understudy for the lead role of Ann in the production and got to perform the role on a few occasions. In 1980, she played the roles of Zelda Fitzgerald and Sylvia Beach in the American Place Theatre's production of Paris Lights. In 1981, she performed in a production of Hey, Look Me Over! at Avery Fisher Hall. In 1983, Summerhays returned to the Broadway production of A Chorus Line to once again play Sheila. In 1984, she appeared as Maria in On Approval at the Roundabout Theatre. In 1985, she played Jane and was the understudy for Ann in the national company tour of Sugar Babies. In 1986, Summerhays starred as Lady Jaqueline Carstone in the original Broadway production and Me and My Girl for which she received a Drama Desk Award and a Tony Award nomination. She remained with the production for three years. Over the next two decades Summerhays appeared in several more Broadway productions including the roles of Diana in Lend Me a Tenor, Elizabeth in Taking Steps, Cynthia in The Real Inspector Hound, the musical review Dream, Fritzie and Fraulein Kost in Cabaret, and Miss Madelaine True in The Wild Party. Summerhays also appeared in several Off-Broadway and regional theater productions including Sympathy Jones, Camila, Broadway Gypsies, Good News, and Promises, Promises.\nEngland is a country that is part of the United Kingdom. It shares land borders with Wales to the west and Scotland to the north. The Irish Sea lies west of England and the Celtic Sea to the southwest. England is separated from continental Europe by the North Sea to the east and the English Channel to the south. The country covers five-eighths of the island of Great Britain, which lies in the North Atlantic, and includes over 100 smaller islands, such as the Isles of Scilly and the Isle of Wight.The area now called England was first inhabited by modern humans during the Upper Palaeolithic period, but takes its name from the Angles, a Germanic tribe deriving its name from the Anglia peninsula, who settled during the 5th and 6th centuries. England became a unified state in the 10th century, and since the Age of Discovery, which began during the 15th century, has had a significant cultural and legal impact on the wider world. The English language, the Anglican Church, and English law \u2013 the basis for the common law legal systems of many other countries around the world \u2013 developed in England, and the country's parliamentary system of government has been widely adopted by other nations. The Industrial Revolution began in 18th-century England, transforming its society into the world's first industrialised nation.England's terrain is chiefly low hills and plains, especially in central and southern England. However, there is upland and mountainous terrain in the north (for example, the Lake District and Pennines) and in the west (for example, Dartmoor and the Shropshire Hills). The capital is London, which has the largest metropolitan area in both the United Kingdom and the European Union. England's population of over 55 million comprises 84% of the population of the United Kingdom, largely concentrated around London, the South East, and conurbations in the Midlands, the North West, the North East, and Yorkshire, which each developed as major industrial regions during the 19th century.The Kingdom of England \u2013 which after 1535 included Wales \u2013 ceased being a separate sovereign state on 1 May 1707, when the Acts of Union put into effect the terms agreed in the Treaty of Union the previous year, resulting in a political union with the Kingdom of Scotland to create the Kingdom of Great Britain. In 1801, Great Britain was united with the Kingdom of Ireland (through another Act of Union) to become the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland. In 1922 the Irish Free State seceded from the United Kingdom, leading to the latter being renamed the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.\nHugo Miguel da Encarna\u00e7\u00e3o Pires Faria (born 15 February 1983) is a Portuguese footballer who plays for Louletano D.C. as a midfielder.\nAgent Smith is a fictional character and the primary antagonist in The Matrix franchise. He is portrayed by Hugo Weaving in the films and voiced by Christopher Corey Smith in The Matrix: Path of Neo.In 2008, Agent Smith was selected by Empire Magazine as the 84th Greatest Movie Character of All Time. In 2013, Weaving reprised the role for a General Electric advertisement.\n", "path": ["jane summerhays", "United States of America", "English", "England"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the country location of origin of the continent of the country location of citizenship of andrew combe?", "correct_answer": "Sweden", "model_answer": " [/INST] Answer: Andrew Combe was a Scottish physician and phrenologist. Scotland is part of the United Kingdom, located in the northern part of Europe.\n\nExplanation: Andrew Combe was born in Scotland on October 27, ", "context": "Sweden (Swedish: Sverige [\u02c8sv\u00e6rj\u025b] (listen)), formal name: the Kingdom of Sweden (Swedish: Konungariket Sverige ), is a Scandinavian Nordic country in Northern Europe. It borders Norway to the west and north and Finland to the east, and is connected to Denmark in the southwest by a bridge-tunnel across the \u00d6resund, a strait at the Swedish-Danish border. At 450,295 square kilometres (173,860 sq mi), Sweden is the largest country in Northern Europe, the third-largest country in the European Union and the fifth largest country in Europe by area. Sweden has a total population of 10.3 million of which 2.5 million have a foreign background. It has a low population density of 22 inhabitants per square kilometre (57/sq mi). The highest concentration is in the central and southern half of the country.Sweden is part of the geographical area of Fennoscandia. The climate is in general very mild for its northerly latitude due to significant maritime influence. In spite of the high latitude, Sweden often has warm continental summers, being located in between the North Atlantic, the Baltic Sea and the vast Eurasian Russian landmass. The general climate and environment varies significantly from the south and north due to the vast latitudal difference and much of Sweden has reliably cold and snowy winters. It also has a vast coastline with many offshore islands, many lakes, a large proportion of the country covered by forests and includes a portion of the Scandinavian Mountains.Germanic peoples have inhabited Sweden since prehistoric times, emerging into history as the Geats (Swedish G\u00f6tar) and Swedes (Svear) and constituting the sea peoples known as the Norsemen. Southern Sweden is predominantly agricultural, while the north is heavily forested.  Today,  the sovereign state of Sweden is a constitutional monarchy and parliamentary democracy, with a monarch as head of state, like its neighbour Norway. The capital city is Stockholm, which is also the most populous city in the country. Legislative power is vested in the 349-member unicameral Riksdag. Executive power is exercised by the government chaired by the prime minister. Sweden is a unitary state, currently divided into 21 counties and 290 municipalities.An independent Swedish state emerged during the early 12th century. After the Black Death in the middle of the 14th century killed about a third of the Scandinavian population, the Hanseatic League threatened Scandinavia's culture, finances and languages. This led to the forming of the Scandinavian Kalmar Union in 1397, which Sweden left in 1523. When Sweden became involved in the Thirty Years War on the Reformist side, an expansion of its territories began and eventually the Swedish Empire was formed. This became one of the great powers of Europe until the early 18th century. Swedish territories outside the Scandinavian Peninsula were gradually lost during the 18th and 19th centuries, ending with the annexation of present-day Finland by Russia in 1809. The last war in which Sweden was directly involved was in 1814, when Norway was militarily forced into personal union. Since then, Sweden has been at peace, maintaining an official policy of neutrality in foreign affairs. The union with Norway was peacefully dissolved in 1905. Sweden was formally neutral through both world wars and the Cold War, albeit Sweden has since 2009 openly moved towards cooperation with NATO. Sweden has close relations to its Nordic neighbours, including linguistically, with the Swedish language being an official language in Finland and Swedish also being mutually intelligible with Danish and Norwegian.After the end of the Cold War, Sweden joined the European Union (EU) on 1 January 1995, but declined NATO membership, as well as Eurozone (EZ) membership following a referendum. It is also a member of the United Nations, the Nordic Council, the Council of Europe, the World Trade Organization and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). Sweden maintains a Nordic social welfare system that provides universal health care and tertiary education for its citizens. It has the world's eleventh-highest per capita income and ranks highly in numerous metrics of national performance, including quality of life, health, education, protection of civil liberties, economic competitiveness, equality, prosperity and human development.\nEurope is a Swedish rock band formed in Upplands V\u00e4sby in 1979,  by vocalist Joey Tempest, guitarist John Norum, bassist Peter Olsson, and drummer Tony Reno. They got a major breakthrough in Sweden in 1982 by winning the televised competition \"Rock-SM\" (Swedish Rock Championships): it was the first time this competition was held, and Europe became a larger success than the competition itself.Since their formation, Europe has released eleven studio albums, three live albums, three compilations and twenty-four music videos.Europe rose to international fame in the 1980s with their third album, 1986's The Final Countdown, which has sold over 3 million copies in the United States and 15 million copies worldwide (including album and single). Europe have sold over 25 million records worldwide.  The band has had two top 20 albums on the Billboard 200 chart (The Final Countdown  and Out of This World) and three top 30 singles on the Billboard Hot 100 chart (\"The Final Countdown\", \"Rock the Night\" and \"Carrie\").Europe went on hiatus in 1992, reunited temporarily for a one-off performance in Stockholm on New Year's Eve 1999 and announced an official reunion in 2003. Since then the band has released six albums, Start from the Dark (2004), Secret Society (2006), Last Look at Eden (2009), Bag of Bones (2012), War of Kings (2015) and Walk the Earth (2017).Europe has achieved new attention in the US due to being featured in a GEICO Insurance cable television commercial campaign viewed for many months across the US in 2015\u201316.The band is mainly influenced by Whitesnake, Deep Purple, Rainbow, Led Zeppelin, Thin Lizzy, UFO and Michael Schenker Group.\nCrataegus \u00d7 sinaica is a hawthorn that originated as a hybrid between two other hawthorn species, C. azarolus in series Orientales and C. monogyna in series Crataegus. It grows in the central and eastern parts of the Mediterranean region on rocky mountain slopes. In Egypt it grows in the mountains near Saint Catherine in South Sinai, where it is known as Za'rur or Za'rur al-awdiyah.\nSodus Outer Light is a lighthouse at the end of the western of the two piers defining the channel from Lake Ontario into Sodus Bay, New York, first established in 1858. In 1938, the wood tower was replaced with the current cast iron structure, and the light was converted from kerosene to electricity.\nZimplow is a manufacturer based in Zimbabwe.  Zimplow makes farm equipment such as plows, harrows, planters, cultivators, hoes, shovels etc.  Zimplow is a specialist in animal traction technology and its main equipment brand is the Mealie Brand. Other divisions include C.T.Bolts and Tassburg.The company's stock is listed on the Zimbabwe Stock Exchange and on its stock index, the Zimbabwe Industrial Index. The company is headquartered in Bulawayo.\nThe United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, commonly known as the United Kingdom (UK) or Britain, is a sovereign country located off the north-western coast of the European mainland. The United Kingdom includes the island of Great Britain, the north-eastern part of the island of Ireland, and many smaller islands. Northern Ireland is the only part of the United Kingdom that shares a land border with another sovereign state, the Republic of Ireland. Apart from this land border, the United Kingdom is surrounded by the Atlantic Ocean, with the North Sea to the east, the English Channel to the south and the Celtic Sea to the south-west, giving it the 12th-longest coastline in the world. The Irish Sea lies between Great Britain and Ireland. The United Kingdom's 242,500 square kilometres (93,600 sq mi) were home to an estimated 66.0 million inhabitants in 2017.The United Kingdom is a unitary parliamentary democracy and constitutional monarchy. The current monarch is Queen Elizabeth II, who has reigned since 1952, making her the world's longest-serving current head of state. The United Kingdom's capital and largest city is London, a global city and financial centre with an urban area population of 10.3 million. Other major cities include Birmingham, Manchester, Glasgow, Leeds and Liverpool.The United Kingdom consists of four constituent countries: England, Scotland, Wales, and Northern Ireland. Their capitals are London, Edinburgh, Cardiff, and Belfast, respectively. Apart from England, the countries have their own devolved governments, each with varying powers, but such power is delegated by the Parliament of the United Kingdom, which may enact laws unilaterally altering or abolishing devolution (England does not have any devolved power). The nearby Isle of Man, Bailiwick of Guernsey and Bailiwick of Jersey are not part of the UK, being Crown dependencies with the British Government responsible for defence and international representation. The medieval conquest and subsequent annexation of Wales by the Kingdom of England, followed by the union between England and Scotland in 1707 to form the Kingdom of Great Britain, and the union in 1801 of Great Britain with the Kingdom of Ireland created the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland. Five-sixths of Ireland seceded from the UK in 1922, leaving the present formulation of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. There are fourteen British Overseas Territories, the remnants of the British Empire which, at its height in the 1920s, encompassed almost a quarter of the world's land mass and was the largest empire in history. British influence can be observed in the language, culture and political systems of many of its former colonies.The United Kingdom is a developed country and has the world's fifth-largest economy by nominal GDP and ninth-largest economy by purchasing power parity. It has a high-income economy and has a very high Human Development Index rating, ranking 14th in the world. It was the world's first industrialised country and the world's foremost power during the 19th and early 20th centuries. The UK remains a great power, with considerable economic, cultural, military, scientific and political influence internationally. It is a recognised nuclear weapons state and is sixth in military expenditure in the world. It has been a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council since its first session in 1946. It has been a leading member state of the European Union (EU) and its predecessor, the European Economic Community (EEC), since 1973; however, a referendum in 2016 resulted in 51.9 per cent of UK voters favouring leaving the European Union, and the country's exit is being negotiated. The United Kingdom is also a member of the Commonwealth of Nations, the Council of Europe, the G7, the G20, NATO, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), Interpol and the World Trade Organization (WTO).\nThe A5036 is a road in Merseyside, England, which comprises two sections separated by a gap of around 1.6 miles (2.6 km).\nAndrew Combe (27 October 1797 \u2013 9 August 1847) was a Scottish physician and phrenologist.\n", "path": ["andrew combe", "United Kingdom", "Europe", "Sweden"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the located in the administrative terroritorial entity of the headquarters location of the regulated by of the sport of toto cup?", "correct_answer": "canton of Z\u00fcrich", "model_answer": " [/INST] The headquarters of the Toto Cup, the Israeli association football tournament, is located in the canton of Z\u00fcrich, Switzerland. The Toto Cup is regulated by the F\u00e9d\u00e9ration Internationale de Football Association (FIFA), which is", "context": "The Toto Cup (Hebrew: \u05d2\u05d1\u05d9\u05e2 \u05d4\u05d8\u05d5\u05d8\u05d5\u200e, Gvia HaToto) is an association football tournament that exists separately in the two highest divisions in Israel: the Premier League and Liga Leumit.From 1999 to 2009, the Toto Cup tournament was also held for the third division which was later canceled due to the cancellation of Liga Artzit.The Toto Cup is the third important competition in Israeli football after the Israeli Premier League and the Israeli State Cup and is considered as a negligible cup, and therefore the Israeli football teams are not investing in many of its games and uses the game to test the foreign players and to give a chance to the bench players and the youth players. However, the Israeli Sports Betting Council pays 1.25 million NIS for the winner, while the runner-up receive 950,000 NIS.\nAuntie's Portrait is a 1915 short comedy film.\nZ\u00fcrich or Zurich ( ZEWR-ik; see below for other names) is the largest city in Switzerland and the capital of the canton of Z\u00fcrich. It is located in north-central Switzerland at the northwestern tip of Lake Z\u00fcrich. The municipality has approximately 409,000 inhabitants, the urban agglomeration 1.315 million and the Z\u00fcrich metropolitan area 1.83 million. Z\u00fcrich is a hub for railways, roads, and air traffic. Both Zurich Airport and railway station are the largest and busiest in the country.Permanently settled for over 2,000 years, Z\u00fcrich was founded by the Romans, who, in 15 BC, called it Turicum. However, early settlements have been found dating back more than 6,400 years ago. During the Middle Ages, Z\u00fcrich gained the independent and privileged status of imperial immediacy and, in 1519, became a primary centre of the Protestant Reformation in Europe under the leadership of Huldrych Zwingli.The official language of Z\u00fcrich is German, but the main spoken language is the local variant of the Alemannic Swiss German dialect, Z\u00fcrich German.Many museums and art galleries can be found in the city, including the Swiss National Museum and the Kunsthaus. Schauspielhaus Z\u00fcrich is one of the most important theatres in the German-speaking world.Z\u00fcrich is a leading global city and among the world's largest financial centres despite having a relatively small population. The city is home to a large number of financial institutions and banking companies. Most of Switzerland's research and development centres are concentrated in Z\u00fcrich and the low tax rates attract overseas companies to set up their headquarters there.Monocle's 2012 \"Quality of Life Survey\" ranked Z\u00fcrich first on a list of the top 25 cities in the world \"to make a base within\". According to several surveys from 2006 to 2008, Z\u00fcrich was named the city with the best quality of life in the world as well as the wealthiest city in Europe in terms of GDP per capita.\nCyclura carinata bartschi, commonly known as Bartsch's iguana or the Booby Cay iguana,  is a lizard of the genus Cyclura endemic to a single cay, Booby Cay, in The Bahamas .\nThe F\u00e9d\u00e9ration Internationale de Football Association (FIFA  FEEF-\u0259; French for International Federation of Association Football, Spanish: Federaci\u00f3n Internacionalde F\u00fatbol Asociaci\u00f3n, German: Internationaler Verband des Association Football) is a non-profit organization which describes itself as an international governing body of association football, f\u00fatsal, beach soccer, and efootball. It is the highest governing body of football.FIFA was founded in 1904 to oversee international competition among the national associations of Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, the Netherlands, Spain, Sweden, and Switzerland. Headquartered in Z\u00fcrich, its membership now comprises 211 national associations. Member countries must each also be members of one of the six regional confederations into which the world is divided: Africa, Asia, Europe, North & Central America and the Caribbean, Oceania, and South America.Today, FIFA outlines a number of objectives in the organizational Statues, including growing football internationally, providing efforts to ensure football is accessible to everyone, and advocating for integrity and fair play. FIFA is responsible for the organization and promotion of football's major international tournaments, notably the World Cup which commenced in 1930 and the Women's World Cup which commenced in 1991. Although FIFA does not solely set the rules of football, that being the responsibility of the International Football Association Board of which FIFA is a member, it applies and enforces the rules across all FIFA competitions. All FIFA tournaments generate revenue from sponsorship; in 2018, FIFA had revenues of over US $4.6 billion, ending the 2015-2018 cycle with a net positive of US $1.2 billion, and had cash reserves of over US $2.7 billion. Reports by investigative journalists have linked FIFA leadership with corruption, bribery, and vote-rigging related to the election of FIFA president Sepp Blatter and the organization's decision to award the 2018 and 2022 World Cups to Russia and Qatar, respectively. These allegations led to the indictments of nine high-ranking FIFA officials and five corporate executives by the U.S. Department of Justice on charges including racketeering, wire fraud, and money laundering. On 27 May 2015, several of these officials were arrested by Swiss authorities, who were launching a simultaneous but separate criminal investigation into how the organization awarded the 2018 and 2022 World Cups. Those among these officials who were also indicted in the U.S. are expected to be extradited to face charges there as well. Many officials were suspended by FIFA's ethics committee including Sepp Blatter and Michel Platini. In early 2017 reports became public about FIFA president Gianni Infantino attempting to prevent the re-elections of both chairmen of the ethics committee, Cornel Borb\u00e9ly and Hans-Joachim Eckert, during the FIFA congress in May 2017. On May 9, 2017, following Infantino's proposal, FIFA Council decided not to renew the mandates of Borb\u00e9ly and Eckert. Together with the chairmen, 11 of 13 committee members were removed.\nPlocamopherus maculatus is a species of sea slug, a nudibranch, a shell-less marine gastropod mollusk in the family Polyceridae.\nAssociation football, more commonly known as football or soccer, is a team sport played with a spherical ball between two teams of eleven players. It is played by 250 million players in over 200 countries and dependencies, making it the world's most popular sport. The game is played on a rectangular field called a pitch with a goal at each end. The object of the game is to score by moving the ball beyond the goal line into the opposing goal.Association football is one of a family of football codes, which emerged from various ball games played worldwide since antiquity. The modern game traces its origins to 1863 when the Laws of the Game were originally codified in England by The Football Association.Players are not allowed to touch the ball with hands or arms while it is in play, except for the goalkeepers within the penalty area. Other players mainly use their feet to strike or pass the ball, but may also use any other part of their body except the hands and the arms. The team that scores most goals by the end of the match wins. If the score is level at the end of the game, either a draw is declared or the game goes into extra time or a penalty shootout depending on the format of the competition. Association football is governed internationally by the International Federation of Association Football (FIFA; French: F\u00e9d\u00e9ration Internationale de Football Association), which organises World Cups for both men and women every four years.\nThe canton of Z\u00fcrich (German: Kanton Z\u00fcrich ) is a Swiss canton in the northeastern part of the country. With a population of 1,504,346 (as of 31 December 2017), it is the most populated canton in the country.. Its capital is the city of Z\u00fcrich. The official language is German. The local Swiss German dialect, called Z\u00fcrit\u00fc\u00fctsch, is commonly spoken. In English the name of the canton and its capital is often written without an umlaut.\nIsaac ben Sheshet Perfet (1326\u20131408) (Hebrew: \u05d9\u05e6\u05d7\u05e7 \u05d1\u05df \u05e9\u05e9\u05ea) was a Spanish Talmudic authority, also known by his acronym, Rivash (\u05e8\u05d9\u05d1\"\u05e9). He was born at Valencia and settled early in life at Barcelona, where he studied at the school of Nissim of Gerona.\n", "path": ["toto cup", "association football", "FIFA", "Z\u00fcrich", "canton of Z\u00fcrich"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the flag of the indigenous to of the language of work or name of sargasso of space?", "correct_answer": "the flag of england", "model_answer": " [/INST] The flag of the country whose language was used to write the work \"Sargasso of Space\" and is also known as the language of the work is English. The flag of England, which represents the English language and the country, is derived from", "context": "Joan Kerr (1938-2004) was an Australian academic and cultural preservationist. Initially her interest was sparked in preserving the architectural heritage of Australia, but over time her interests spread to art history and Australian culture in general. She taught at many universities throughout the country and was involved in Historical Societies and Preservation Trusts in a variety of the territories. She wrote books on Australia's historic architecture, feminist artists, cartoonists and her major life work was producing the Dictionary of Australian Artists: Painters, Sketchers, Photographers and Engravers to 1870.\nEnglish is a West Germanic language that was first spoken in early medieval England and eventually became a global lingua franca. It is named after the Angles, one of the Germanic tribes that migrated to the area of Great Britain that later took their name, as England. Both names derive from Anglia, a peninsula in the Baltic Sea. The language is closely related to Frisian and Low Saxon, and its vocabulary has been significantly influenced by other Germanic languages, particularly Norse (a North Germanic language), and to a greater extent by Latin and French.English has developed over the course of more than 1,400 years. The earliest forms of English, a group of West Germanic (Ingvaeonic) dialects brought to Great Britain by Anglo-Saxon settlers in the 5th century, are collectively called Old English. Middle English began in the late 11th century with the Norman conquest of England; this was a period in which the language was influenced by French. Early Modern English began in the late 15th century with the introduction of the printing press to London, the printing of the King James Bible and the start of the Great Vowel Shift.Through the worldwide influence of the British Empire, and later the United States, Modern English has been spreading around the world since the 17th century. Through all types of printed and electronic media, and spurred by the emergence of the United States as a global superpower, English has become the leading language of international discourse and the lingua franca in many regions and professional contexts such as science, navigation and law.English is the largest language by number of speakers, and the third most-spoken native language in the world, after Standard Chinese and Spanish. It is the most widely learned second language and is either the official language or one of the official languages in almost 60 sovereign states. There are more people who have learned it as a second language than there are native speakers. It is estimated that there are over 2 billion speakers of English. English is the most commonly spoken language in the United Kingdom, the United States, Canada, Australia, Ireland and New Zealand, and it is widely spoken in some areas of the Caribbean, Africa and South Asia. It is a co-official language of the United Nations, the European Union and many other world and regional international organisations. It is the most widely spoken Germanic language, accounting for at least 70% of speakers of this Indo-European branch. English has a vast vocabulary, though counting how many words any language has is impossible. English speakers are called \"Anglophones\".Modern English grammar is the result of a gradual change from a typical Indo-European dependent marking pattern, with a rich inflectional morphology and relatively free word order, to a mostly analytic pattern with little inflection, a fairly fixed SVO word order and a complex syntax. Modern English relies more on auxiliary verbs and word order for the expression of complex tenses, aspect and mood, as well as passive constructions, interrogatives and some negation. The variation among the accents and dialects of English used in different countries and regions\u2014in terms of phonetics and phonology, and sometimes also vocabulary, grammar, and spelling\u2014can often be understood by speakers of different dialects, but in extreme cases can lead to confusion or even mutual unintelligibility between English speakers.\nThe Northrop F-5A and F-5B Freedom Fighter and the F-5E and F-5F Tiger II are part of a supersonic light fighter family, initially designed in the late 1950s by Northrop Corporation. Being smaller and simpler than contemporaries such as the McDonnell Douglas F-4 Phantom II, the F-5 cost less to both procure and operate, making it a popular export aircraft. The F-5 started life as a privately funded light fighter program by Northrop in the 1950s. The design team wrapped a small, highly aerodynamic fighter around two compact and high-thrust General Electric J85 engines, focusing on performance and low cost of maintenance. Though primarily designed for the day air superiority role, the aircraft is also a capable ground-attack platform. The F-5A entered service in the early 1960s. During the Cold War, over 800 were produced through 1972 for U.S. allies. Though the United States Air Force (USAF) had no need for a light fighter, it did procure approximately 1,200 Northrop T-38 Talon trainer aircraft, which were directly based on the F-5A.After winning the International Fighter Aircraft competition in 1970, a program aimed at providing effective low-cost fighters to American allies, Northrop introduced the second-generation F-5E Tiger II in 1972. This upgrade included more powerful engines, higher fuel capacity, greater wing area and improved leading edge extensions for a better turn rate, optional air-to-air refueling, and improved avionics including air-to-air radar. Primarily used by American allies, it remains in US service to support training exercises. It has served in a wide array of roles, being able to perform both air and ground attack duties; the type was used extensively in the Vietnam War. A total of 1,400 Tiger IIs were built before production ended in 1987. More than 3,800 F-5 and the closely related T-38 advanced trainer aircraft were produced in Hawthorne, California. The F-5N/F variants are in service with the United States Navy and United States Marine Corps as an adversary trainer. Approximately 500 aircraft are in service as of 2014.The F-5 was also developed into a dedicated reconnaissance version, the RF-5 Tigereye. The F-5 also served as a starting point for a series of design studies which resulted in the Northrop YF-17 and the F/A-18 navalized fighter aircraft. The Northrop F-20 Tigershark was an advanced variant to succeed the F-5E which was ultimately canceled when export customers did not emerge.\nAndreas Perlach, also known as Andreas Perlacher and Andreas Perlachius ex Wittschein Stiriensis, (1490\u20131551) was born in Sve\u010dina, in the Habsburg empire (now in Slovenia).  Perlach was the court astrologer to Archduke Ferdinand, later Ferdinand I, Holy Roman Emperor, in addition to being a practicing physician and a lecturer of mathematics and astrology at the University of Vienna.  He received his doctorate of medicine from the University of Vienna in 1530.Perlach is notable for his support of the use of almanacs, having lectured on their importance and usage.  His lectures were printed in outline form in 1519 and in full commentary in 1551.  He also composed annual astrological almanacs for most of his career.Perlach lectured on mathematics from 1515 to 1549 as well as astrology and its application in medicine.  He became dean of the Faculty of Arts, was appointed four times as dean of the Medical Faculty in Vienna, and as chancellor of the University of Vienna in 1549. His tombstone is built into the wall of the St. Stephen's Cathedral in Vienna.\n\"The Sargasso of Space\" is also the title of a 1931 sf novelette by Edmond HamiltonSargasso of Space is a science fiction novel by American writer Andre Norton, written under the alternate pseudonym \"Andrew North\".  It was published in 1955 by Gnome Press in an edition of 4,000 copies.\nLiver: A Fictional Organ with a Surface Anatomy of Four Lobes is the seventh collection of short stories by Will Self. The stories in the collection are all connected to the liver and was described by the author as \"...a collection of two novellas and two longer short stories, all on a liverish theme. Each story features different people suffering from different forms of liver damage.\" Time Out was one of the first publications to review it and said...\"This inspired collection of four stories uses the liver as framework and controlling metaphor \u2013 there\u2019s a tale for each lobe \u2013 but is less interested in the organ as a metabolic regulator than in what happens when it\u2019s damaged beyond repair. At this point, Self\u2019s gift for (ahem) bilious satire kicks in, its target largely the \u2018slapstick of addiction\u2019 \u2013 for which the reformed junky has witheringly little time...Self has all the fun you\u2019d expect with this, and the result is satire so vicious it makes Charlie Brooker look restrained.\"\nThe flag of England is derived from Saint George's Cross (heraldic blazon: Argent, a cross gules). The association of the red cross as an emblem of England can be traced back to the Middle Ages, and it was used as a component in the design of the Union Flag in 1606. Since the 1990s it has been in increasingly wide use, particularly at national sporting events.\nEngland is a country that is part of the United Kingdom. It shares land borders with Wales to the west and Scotland to the north. The Irish Sea lies west of England and the Celtic Sea to the southwest. England is separated from continental Europe by the North Sea to the east and the English Channel to the south. The country covers five-eighths of the island of Great Britain, which lies in the North Atlantic, and includes over 100 smaller islands, such as the Isles of Scilly and the Isle of Wight.The area now called England was first inhabited by modern humans during the Upper Palaeolithic period, but takes its name from the Angles, a Germanic tribe deriving its name from the Anglia peninsula, who settled during the 5th and 6th centuries. England became a unified state in the 10th century, and since the Age of Discovery, which began during the 15th century, has had a significant cultural and legal impact on the wider world. The English language, the Anglican Church, and English law \u2013 the basis for the common law legal systems of many other countries around the world \u2013 developed in England, and the country's parliamentary system of government has been widely adopted by other nations. The Industrial Revolution began in 18th-century England, transforming its society into the world's first industrialised nation.England's terrain is chiefly low hills and plains, especially in central and southern England. However, there is upland and mountainous terrain in the north (for example, the Lake District and Pennines) and in the west (for example, Dartmoor and the Shropshire Hills). The capital is London, which has the largest metropolitan area in both the United Kingdom and the European Union. England's population of over 55 million comprises 84% of the population of the United Kingdom, largely concentrated around London, the South East, and conurbations in the Midlands, the North West, the North East, and Yorkshire, which each developed as major industrial regions during the 19th century.The Kingdom of England \u2013 which after 1535 included Wales \u2013 ceased being a separate sovereign state on 1 May 1707, when the Acts of Union put into effect the terms agreed in the Treaty of Union the previous year, resulting in a political union with the Kingdom of Scotland to create the Kingdom of Great Britain. In 1801, Great Britain was united with the Kingdom of Ireland (through another Act of Union) to become the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland. In 1922 the Irish Free State seceded from the United Kingdom, leading to the latter being renamed the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.\n", "path": ["sargasso of space", "English", "England", "the flag of england"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the located on terrain feature of the located in or next to body of water of the country location of zacapa airport?", "correct_answer": "third planet", "model_answer": " [/INST] The terrain feature located south of Zacapa Airport is high terrain. Zacapa Airport is located on the southwest side of the city of Zacapa, along the R\u00edo Grande de Zacapa. The high terrain is situated directly to", "context": "Pink Dream (Chinese: \u7c89\u7ea2\u8272\u7684\u68a6/\u7c89\u7d05\u8272\u7684\u5922; pinyin: F\u011bn h\u00f3ng s\u00e8 de m\u00e8ng) is a 1932 Chinese silent film and an early film by director Cai Chusheng. A melodrama, the film's pointed critique of the decadent urban lifestyle was nevertheless met with criticism by Shanghai's progressives, who regarded the film itself as decadent and excessively influenced by American cinema, particularly the film's numerous scenes of Shanghai's dance halls. Today the film is generally regarded as Cai's last film before his turn towards more overtly leftist films.It is sometimes translated as A Dream in Pink. An extant print of the film is maintained by the China Film Archives.\nZacapa Airport (ICAO: MGZA) is an airport serving the city of Zacapa, the capital municipality of Zacapa Department in Guatemala. The airport is on the southwest side of the city, alongside the R\u00edo Grande de Zacapa.There is high terrain directly south of the airport.\nPlaniplastron is an extinct genus of snapping turtle. It was first described by Chkhikvadze in 1971. It was assigned to the family Chelydridae by R. L. Carroll in 1988.\nGuatemala ( (listen) GWAH-t\u0259-MAH-l\u0259; Spanish: [gwate\u02c8mala] (listen)), officially the Republic of Guatemala (Spanish: Rep\u00fablica de Guatemala), is a country in Central America bordered by Mexico to the north and west, Belize and the Caribbean to the northeast, Honduras to the east, El Salvador to the southeast and the Pacific Ocean to the south. With an estimated population of around 16.6 million, it is the most populated country in Central America. Guatemala is a representative democracy; its capital and largest city is Nueva Guatemala de la Asunci\u00f3n, also known as Guatemala City.The territory of modern Guatemala once formed the core of the Maya civilization, which extended across Mesoamerica. Most of the country was conquered by the Spanish in the 16th century, becoming part of the viceroyalty of New Spain. Guatemala attained independence in 1821 as part of the Federal Republic of Central America, which dissolved by 1841.From the mid to late 19th century, Guatemala experienced chronic instability and civil strife. Beginning in the early 20th century, it was ruled by a series of dictators backed by the United Fruit Company and the United States government. In 1944, authoritarian leader Jorge Ubico was overthrown by a pro-democratic military coup, initiating a decade-long revolution that led to sweeping social and economic reforms. A U.S.-backed military coup in 1954 ended the revolution and installed a dictatorship.From 1960 to 1996, Guatemala endured a bloody civil war fought between the US-backed government and leftist rebels, including genocidal massacres of the Maya population perpetrated by the military. Since a United Nations-negotiated peace accord, Guatemala has witnessed both economic growth and successful democratic elections, though it continues to struggle with high rates of poverty, crime, drug trade, and instability. As of 2014, Guatemala ranks 31st of 33 Latin American and Caribbean countries in terms of the Human Development Index.Guatemala's abundance of biologically significant and unique ecosystems includes a large number of endemic species and contributes to Mesoamerica's designation as a biodiversity hotspot.\nMichel Vonk (born 28 October 1968) is a Dutch former professional footballer and current manager.As a player, he was a defender from 1986 to 2001, notably playing in the Premier League for Manchester City. He also played in England for Oldham Athletic and Sheffield United, as well as also playing in his native land for AZ, SVV Dordrecht and MVV Maastricht.\nThe Pacific Ocean is the largest and deepest of Earth's oceanic divisions. It extends from the Arctic Ocean in the north to the Southern Ocean (or, depending on definition, to Antarctica) in the south and is bounded by Asia and Australia in the west and the Americas in the east.At 165,250,000 square kilometers (63,800,000 square miles) in area (as defined with an Antarctic southern border), this largest division of the World Ocean\u2014and, in turn, the hydrosphere\u2014covers about 46% of Earth's water surface and about one-third of its total surface area, making it larger than all of Earth's land area combined. The centers of both the Water Hemisphere and the Western Hemisphere are in the Pacific Ocean. The equator subdivides it into the North(ern) Pacific Ocean and South(ern) Pacific Ocean, with two exceptions: the Gal\u00e1pagos and Gilbert Islands, while straddling the equator, are deemed wholly within the South Pacific. Its mean depth is 4,000 meters (13,000 feet). The Mariana Trench in the western North Pacific is the deepest point in the world, reaching a depth of 10,911 meters (35,797 feet). The western Pacific has many peripheral seas.Though the peoples of Asia and Oceania have traveled the Pacific Ocean since prehistoric times, the eastern Pacific was first sighted by Europeans in the early 16th century when Spanish explorer Vasco N\u00fa\u00f1ez de Balboa crossed the Isthmus of Panama in 1513 and discovered the great \"southern sea\" which he named Mar del Sur (in Spanish). The ocean's current name was coined by Portuguese explorer Ferdinand Magellan during the Spanish circumnavigation of the world in 1521, as he encountered favorable winds on reaching the ocean. He called it Mar Pac\u00edfico, which in both Portuguese and Spanish means \"peaceful sea\".\nEarth is the third planet from the Sun and the only astronomical object known to harbor life. According to radiometric dating and other sources of evidence, Earth formed over 4.5 billion years ago. Earth's gravity interacts with other objects in space, especially the Sun and the Moon, Earth's only natural satellite. Earth orbits around the Sun in 365.26 days, a period known as an Earth year. During this time, Earth rotates about its axis about 366.26 times.Earth's axis of rotation is tilted with respect to its orbital plane, producing seasons on Earth. The gravitational interaction between Earth and the Moon causes tides, stabilizes Earth's orientation on its axis and gradually slows its rotation. Earth is the densest planet in the Solar System and the largest and most massive of the four terrestrial planets.Earth's lithosphere is divided into several rigid tectonic plates that migrate across the surface over many millions of years. About 71% of Earth's surface is covered with water, mostly by oceans. The remaining 29% is land consisting of continents and islands that together contain many lakes, rivers and other sources of water that contribute to the hydrosphere. The majority of Earth's polar regions are covered in ice, including the Antarctic ice sheet and the sea ice of the Arctic ice pack. Earth's interior remains active with a solid iron inner core, a liquid outer core that generates the Earth's magnetic field and a convecting mantle that drives plate tectonics.Within the first billion years of Earth's history, life appeared in the oceans and began to affect the Earth's atmosphere and surface, leading to the proliferation of anaerobic and, later, aerobic organisms. Some geological evidence indicates that life may have arisen as early as 4.1 billion years ago. Since then, the combination of Earth's distance from the Sun, physical properties and geological history have allowed life to evolve and thrive. In the history of life on Earth, biodiversity has gone through long periods of expansion, occasionally punctuated by mass extinction events. Over 99% of all species that ever lived on Earth are extinct. Estimates of the number of species on Earth today vary widely; most species have not been described. Over 7.6 billion humans live on Earth and depend on its biosphere and natural resources for their survival. Humans have developed diverse societies and cultures; politically, the world has around 200 sovereign states.\nThe West Anglia Main Line is one of the two main lines from Liverpool Street, the other being the Great Eastern Main Line to Ipswich and Norwich. It runs generally north through Cheshunt, Broxbourne, Harlow, Bishop's Stortford and Audley End (near Saffron Walden) to Cambridge, with branches serving Stratford, Hertford and Stansted Airport. The line runs along the boundary between Hertfordshire and Essex for much of its length.In the early years the line was the main route from London to Norwich, now primarily a commuter route for stations between Cambridge and London. It was an important goods route for many years as the southern end of a route from coalfields in Yorkshire.Detail on the routes in London are in the Lea Valley Lines article.\n", "path": ["zacapa airport", "Guatemala", "Pacific Ocean", "third planet"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the official language of the country location of origin of the genre of dark suns?", "correct_answer": "English", "model_answer": " [/INST] The official language of the country of origin of the genre of Dark Suns is German.\n\nExplanation: The context does not provide information about the country of origin of the German progressive metal band Dark Suns. However, it does mention", "context": "S\u00e4vedalen is a district (\"kommundel\") located in Partille Municipality. At west it borders to Gothenburg Municipality and is a suburb of Gothenburg.The ice-cream company Triumf Glass was founded and have their headquarters in S\u00e4vedalen.\nWhite Dot is an anti-television organisation based in the UK. It encourages people to not watch television, and also to switch off televisions in caf\u00e9s and pubs with devices such as the TV-B-Gone. It also organises what it calls zocalo (a Mexican term for a town square) events where people are requested to turn off their televisions, go outside and talk to their neighbours.The organisation is named after the white dot that appeared in the middle of old CRT television screens when switched off\u2014as the capacitors discharged, the cathode ray would continue to emit electrons although no longer being controlled horizontally or vertically.White Dot is based in the area around Brighton in England. It is a member of the United States-based TV turnoff organisation.It is a part of an anti-television movement. It is associated with Cornfield electronics, the manufacturer of TV-B-Gone, and has published two books-  Get A Life! The Little Red Book of White Dot, and Spy TV: About Interactive Television.\nPediocactus knowltonii is a rare species of cactus known by the common names Knowlton's miniature cactus, Knowlton's pincushion cactus, and Knowlton's minute cactus. It is endemic to San Juan County, New Mexico, in the United States. It is the smallest and rarest species in genus Pediocactus. It is threatened by a number of human activities. It is federally listed as an endangered species of the United States.This tiny cactus may reach a maximum size of 55 millimeters tall by 30 mm wide. It is often smaller, growing to the size of a US penny. An individual is considered to be an adult when it exceeds 10 mm in diameter. It is spherical or somewhat cylindrical in shape. The areoles are round and covered in hairs. Each areole has up to 26 radial spines which are red, pink, or white in color. The spines are less than 2 mm long. The plant produces a flower up to 35 mm long by 25 mm wide with pinkish tepals, the outer ones sporting brownish midstripes. The fruit is green, ripening reddish, and measures about 4 mm long. According to a genetic analysis, this species probably evolved as a mutation of the larger Pediocactus simpsonii.This plant is only confirmed to exist in one New Mexico county, where there is a single population on a patch of territory measuring about 12 acres (49,000 m2). As of 2008, there are approximately 6100 individuals in this population. The cactus occurs on land very close to the Colorado border; in fact, it has been observed within 30 meters (100 ft) of the state border, but it does not technically occur within the state of Colorado. Its habitat is pinyon-juniper woodland and sagebrush with loamy, gravelly alluvial soils. In some areas the substrate is covered in cobbles. The cactus may grow in the open or in the shade of larger plants.This plant was discovered in 1958. It was immediately sought by collectors of cacti and within 20 years the population had been severely reduced. There may have been 100,000 individuals around the time it was discovered, and this number had been reduced to about 1000 by 1978. It is still a desirable specimen for cactus collectors because of its tiny size and rarity. The seed is available via the internet for about $10 per 100 seeds.Other threats include off-road vehicle use and development near the population. Petroleum exploration activities are common in the area. Livestock graze nearby. Drought may reduce the population. Rodents, especially mice, eagerly consume the fruits, causing seed production to be low.The population is partly fenced and protected by The Nature Conservancy.\nThe United States of America (USA), commonly known as the United States (U.S. or US) or America, is a country comprising 50 states, a federal district, five major self-governing territories, and various possessions. At 3.8 million sq mi (9.8 million km2), the United States is the world's third or fourth largest country by total area and is slightly smaller than the entire continent of Europe's 3.93 million sq mi (10.2 million km2). With a population of more than 327 million people, the U.S. is the third most populous country. Most of the country is located contiguously in North America between Canada and Mexico. The extremely diverse geography, climate, and wildlife of the United States make it one of the world's 17 megadiverse countries.Paleo-Indians migrated from Siberia to the North American mainland at least 12,000 years ago. European colonization began in the 16th century. The United States emerged from the thirteen British colonies established along the East Coast. Following the French and Indian War, numerous disputes between Great Britain and the colonies led to the American Revolution, which began in 1775, and the subsequent Declaration of Independence in 1776. The war ended in 1783 with the United States becoming the first country to gain independence from a European power. The current constitution was adopted in 1788, with the first ten amendments, collectively named the Bill of Rights, being ratified in 1791 to guarantee many fundamental civil liberties. The United States embarked on a vigorous expansion across North America throughout the 19th century, acquiring new territories, displacing Native American tribes, and gradually admitting new states until it spanned the continent by 1848.During the second half of the 19th century, the Civil War led to the abolition of slavery. By the end of the century, the United States had extended into the Pacific Ocean, and its economy, driven in large part by the Industrial Revolution, began to soar. The Spanish\u2013American War and World War I confirmed the country's status as a global military power. The United States emerged from World War II as a global superpower and a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council. The end of the Cold War and the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 left the United States as the world's sole superpower.The United States is a federal republic and a representative democracy. It is a founding member of the United Nations, World Bank, International Monetary Fund, Organization of American States (OAS), and many other international organizations. The United States is a highly developed country, with the world's largest economy by nominal GDP and second-largest economy by PPP, accounting for approximately a quarter of global GDP. The U.S. economy is largely post-industrial, characterized by the dominance of services and knowledge-based activities, although the manufacturing sector remains the second-largest in the world. The United States is the world's largest importer and the second largest exporter of goods, by value. Although its population is only 4.3% of the world total, the U.S. holds 31% of the total wealth in the world, the largest share of global wealth concentrated in a single country.Despite income and wealth disparities, the United States continues to rank very high in measures of socioeconomic performance, including average wage, human development, per capita GDP, and worker productivity. The United States is the foremost military power in the world, making up a third of global military spending, and is a leading political, cultural, and scientific force internationally.\nDark Suns is a German progressive metal band formed in 1997. It is currently composed of guitarists Maik Knappe and Torsten Wenzel, with Maik's brother Niko performing the vocals and drums. The band has released one demo, one EP, and five studio albums as of 2016.\nProgressive metal (sometimes known as prog metal) is a fusion genre melding heavy metal and progressive rock that combines the loud \"aggression\" and amplified guitar-driven sound of the former with the more experimental, cerebral or \"pseudo-classical\" compositions of the latter.Whilst the genre emerged towards the late-1980s, it was not until the 1990s that progressive metal achieved commercial success. Queensr\u00ffche, Dream Theater, Tool, Symphony X, Shadow Gallery,  Angra, King's X, and Fates Warning are a few examples of progressive metal bands who achieved commercial success;  additionally, many other thrash and death metal bands started to incorporate elements of progressive music in their work.\nEnglish is a West Germanic language that was first spoken in early medieval England and eventually became a global lingua franca. It is named after the Angles, one of the Germanic tribes that migrated to the area of Great Britain that later took their name, as England. Both names derive from Anglia, a peninsula in the Baltic Sea. The language is closely related to Frisian and Low Saxon, and its vocabulary has been significantly influenced by other Germanic languages, particularly Norse (a North Germanic language), and to a greater extent by Latin and French.English has developed over the course of more than 1,400 years. The earliest forms of English, a group of West Germanic (Ingvaeonic) dialects brought to Great Britain by Anglo-Saxon settlers in the 5th century, are collectively called Old English. Middle English began in the late 11th century with the Norman conquest of England; this was a period in which the language was influenced by French. Early Modern English began in the late 15th century with the introduction of the printing press to London, the printing of the King James Bible and the start of the Great Vowel Shift.Through the worldwide influence of the British Empire, and later the United States, Modern English has been spreading around the world since the 17th century. Through all types of printed and electronic media, and spurred by the emergence of the United States as a global superpower, English has become the leading language of international discourse and the lingua franca in many regions and professional contexts such as science, navigation and law.English is the largest language by number of speakers, and the third most-spoken native language in the world, after Standard Chinese and Spanish. It is the most widely learned second language and is either the official language or one of the official languages in almost 60 sovereign states. There are more people who have learned it as a second language than there are native speakers. It is estimated that there are over 2 billion speakers of English. English is the most commonly spoken language in the United Kingdom, the United States, Canada, Australia, Ireland and New Zealand, and it is widely spoken in some areas of the Caribbean, Africa and South Asia. It is a co-official language of the United Nations, the European Union and many other world and regional international organisations. It is the most widely spoken Germanic language, accounting for at least 70% of speakers of this Indo-European branch. English has a vast vocabulary, though counting how many words any language has is impossible. English speakers are called \"Anglophones\".Modern English grammar is the result of a gradual change from a typical Indo-European dependent marking pattern, with a rich inflectional morphology and relatively free word order, to a mostly analytic pattern with little inflection, a fairly fixed SVO word order and a complex syntax. Modern English relies more on auxiliary verbs and word order for the expression of complex tenses, aspect and mood, as well as passive constructions, interrogatives and some negation. The variation among the accents and dialects of English used in different countries and regions\u2014in terms of phonetics and phonology, and sometimes also vocabulary, grammar, and spelling\u2014can often be understood by speakers of different dialects, but in extreme cases can lead to confusion or even mutual unintelligibility between English speakers.\nNahorevo is a village in the Centar municipality, in the town of  Sarajevo, Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bosnia and Herzegovina.\n", "path": ["dark suns", "progressive metal", "United States of America", "English"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the indigenous to of the official language of the place of birth of the country location of kariana?", "correct_answer": "England", "model_answer": " [/INST] The indigenous language of the place of birth of the country location of Kariana is not mentioned in the context. The official language of India, where Gujarat is located, is Hindi and English. However, Gujarati is the most", "context": "England is a country that is part of the United Kingdom. It shares land borders with Wales to the west and Scotland to the north. The Irish Sea lies west of England and the Celtic Sea to the southwest. England is separated from continental Europe by the North Sea to the east and the English Channel to the south. The country covers five-eighths of the island of Great Britain, which lies in the North Atlantic, and includes over 100 smaller islands, such as the Isles of Scilly and the Isle of Wight.The area now called England was first inhabited by modern humans during the Upper Palaeolithic period, but takes its name from the Angles, a Germanic tribe deriving its name from the Anglia peninsula, who settled during the 5th and 6th centuries. England became a unified state in the 10th century, and since the Age of Discovery, which began during the 15th century, has had a significant cultural and legal impact on the wider world. The English language, the Anglican Church, and English law \u2013 the basis for the common law legal systems of many other countries around the world \u2013 developed in England, and the country's parliamentary system of government has been widely adopted by other nations. The Industrial Revolution began in 18th-century England, transforming its society into the world's first industrialised nation.England's terrain is chiefly low hills and plains, especially in central and southern England. However, there is upland and mountainous terrain in the north (for example, the Lake District and Pennines) and in the west (for example, Dartmoor and the Shropshire Hills). The capital is London, which has the largest metropolitan area in both the United Kingdom and the European Union. England's population of over 55 million comprises 84% of the population of the United Kingdom, largely concentrated around London, the South East, and conurbations in the Midlands, the North West, the North East, and Yorkshire, which each developed as major industrial regions during the 19th century.The Kingdom of England \u2013 which after 1535 included Wales \u2013 ceased being a separate sovereign state on 1 May 1707, when the Acts of Union put into effect the terms agreed in the Treaty of Union the previous year, resulting in a political union with the Kingdom of Scotland to create the Kingdom of Great Britain. In 1801, Great Britain was united with the Kingdom of Ireland (through another Act of Union) to become the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland. In 1922 the Irish Free State seceded from the United Kingdom, leading to the latter being renamed the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.\nIndia (born May 17, 1977) is the stage name of a pornographic actress, singer and rapper.She began working as an adult actress in around 1998 and has since appeared in over 200 videos. For five years she was an exclusive contract girl for the production company Video Team, and she has an exclusive sex toy line, manufactured by California Exotic Novelties.India owns the record company Black Widow Entertainment, and in 2006 she released her debut solo album Role Play. She had previously been a member of several girl groups; her first album, Hi Naturally, was released in 1994 when she was in the group Harmony Innocents. In July 2002 she was profiled on VH1's All Access hip-hop/porn special. In 2004 her vocals featured in the movie Walking Tall, starring Dwayne \"The Rock\" Johnson.\nTarso Toon (sometimes also known as Tarso Toh; \"Tarso\" means \"high plateau\".) is a volcano in the central Tibesti mountains.The volcano reaches a maximum height of 2,575 metres (8,448 ft) and a width of 21 by 19 kilometres (13 mi \u00d7 12 mi), covering a surface of 600 square kilometres (230 sq mi). It also features a caldera 11 by 12 kilometres (6.8 mi \u00d7 7.5 mi) wide, with a gap on its northern side.It was active in the Miocene, developing over older ignimbrites with tholeiitic rocks. Later, felsic volcanic rocks were emplaced within the caldera and the Voon ignimbrite buried parts of the tholeiite.\nBaekseok University  is a private Christian institution of higher education, located in Cheonan City, in northern South Chungcheong province, South Korea. It carries a maximum enrollment of 15,000.\nEnglish is a West Germanic language that was first spoken in early medieval England and eventually became a global lingua franca. It is named after the Angles, one of the Germanic tribes that migrated to the area of Great Britain that later took their name, as England. Both names derive from Anglia, a peninsula in the Baltic Sea. The language is closely related to Frisian and Low Saxon, and its vocabulary has been significantly influenced by other Germanic languages, particularly Norse (a North Germanic language), and to a greater extent by Latin and French.English has developed over the course of more than 1,400 years. The earliest forms of English, a group of West Germanic (Ingvaeonic) dialects brought to Great Britain by Anglo-Saxon settlers in the 5th century, are collectively called Old English. Middle English began in the late 11th century with the Norman conquest of England; this was a period in which the language was influenced by French. Early Modern English began in the late 15th century with the introduction of the printing press to London, the printing of the King James Bible and the start of the Great Vowel Shift.Through the worldwide influence of the British Empire, and later the United States, Modern English has been spreading around the world since the 17th century. Through all types of printed and electronic media, and spurred by the emergence of the United States as a global superpower, English has become the leading language of international discourse and the lingua franca in many regions and professional contexts such as science, navigation and law.English is the largest language by number of speakers, and the third most-spoken native language in the world, after Standard Chinese and Spanish. It is the most widely learned second language and is either the official language or one of the official languages in almost 60 sovereign states. There are more people who have learned it as a second language than there are native speakers. It is estimated that there are over 2 billion speakers of English. English is the most commonly spoken language in the United Kingdom, the United States, Canada, Australia, Ireland and New Zealand, and it is widely spoken in some areas of the Caribbean, Africa and South Asia. It is a co-official language of the United Nations, the European Union and many other world and regional international organisations. It is the most widely spoken Germanic language, accounting for at least 70% of speakers of this Indo-European branch. English has a vast vocabulary, though counting how many words any language has is impossible. English speakers are called \"Anglophones\".Modern English grammar is the result of a gradual change from a typical Indo-European dependent marking pattern, with a rich inflectional morphology and relatively free word order, to a mostly analytic pattern with little inflection, a fairly fixed SVO word order and a complex syntax. Modern English relies more on auxiliary verbs and word order for the expression of complex tenses, aspect and mood, as well as passive constructions, interrogatives and some negation. The variation among the accents and dialects of English used in different countries and regions\u2014in terms of phonetics and phonology, and sometimes also vocabulary, grammar, and spelling\u2014can often be understood by speakers of different dialects, but in extreme cases can lead to confusion or even mutual unintelligibility between English speakers.\nKariana is a small village in Amreli district in the state of Gujarat, India. This village has lots of peacocks (birds). There is a temple of Mahadev (Lord Shankar) in the village.There is a beautiful lake outside the village's residential area. The village gets water from this lake for agriculture and household uses. The road is small size made of tar. Vehicles driving in both directions have to watch that they do not collide. One can see small hills on both sides of the road. The main crop on the fields is Peanuts and Cotton.\nMary Dillwyn (1816\u20131906) is considered to be the earliest female photographer in Wales, who took photographs of flowers, animals, family and friends in the 1840s and 1850s. She provided a raw insight to the domestic lives of women and children living in 19th century Britain, pushing the boundaries of what could be considered as worthy subjects to photograph.\nJan H\u00e5kan \u00c5berg (10 March 1916 \u2013 8 January  2012) was a Swedish organist and composer.Born in Dalarna, \u00c5berg worked as a cathedral organist in H\u00e4rn\u00f6sand. He is represented in the current Swedish Book of Psalms (1986) with two songs: In dulci jubilo and S\u00e5 \u00e4lskade Gud v\u00e4rlden all.\nThe United States of America (USA), commonly known as the United States (U.S. or US) or America, is a country comprising 50 states, a federal district, five major self-governing territories, and various possessions. At 3.8 million sq mi (9.8 million km2), the United States is the world's third or fourth largest country by total area and is slightly smaller than the entire continent of Europe's 3.93 million sq mi (10.2 million km2). With a population of more than 327 million people, the U.S. is the third most populous country. Most of the country is located contiguously in North America between Canada and Mexico. The extremely diverse geography, climate, and wildlife of the United States make it one of the world's 17 megadiverse countries.Paleo-Indians migrated from Siberia to the North American mainland at least 12,000 years ago. European colonization began in the 16th century. The United States emerged from the thirteen British colonies established along the East Coast. Following the French and Indian War, numerous disputes between Great Britain and the colonies led to the American Revolution, which began in 1775, and the subsequent Declaration of Independence in 1776. The war ended in 1783 with the United States becoming the first country to gain independence from a European power. The current constitution was adopted in 1788, with the first ten amendments, collectively named the Bill of Rights, being ratified in 1791 to guarantee many fundamental civil liberties. The United States embarked on a vigorous expansion across North America throughout the 19th century, acquiring new territories, displacing Native American tribes, and gradually admitting new states until it spanned the continent by 1848.During the second half of the 19th century, the Civil War led to the abolition of slavery. By the end of the century, the United States had extended into the Pacific Ocean, and its economy, driven in large part by the Industrial Revolution, began to soar. The Spanish\u2013American War and World War I confirmed the country's status as a global military power. The United States emerged from World War II as a global superpower and a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council. The end of the Cold War and the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 left the United States as the world's sole superpower.The United States is a federal republic and a representative democracy. It is a founding member of the United Nations, World Bank, International Monetary Fund, Organization of American States (OAS), and many other international organizations. The United States is a highly developed country, with the world's largest economy by nominal GDP and second-largest economy by PPP, accounting for approximately a quarter of global GDP. The U.S. economy is largely post-industrial, characterized by the dominance of services and knowledge-based activities, although the manufacturing sector remains the second-largest in the world. The United States is the world's largest importer and the second largest exporter of goods, by value. Although its population is only 4.3% of the world total, the U.S. holds 31% of the total wealth in the world, the largest share of global wealth concentrated in a single country.Despite income and wealth disparities, the United States continues to rank very high in measures of socioeconomic performance, including average wage, human development, per capita GDP, and worker productivity. The United States is the foremost military power in the world, making up a third of global military spending, and is a leading political, cultural, and scientific force internationally.\n", "path": ["kariana", "India", "United States of America", "English", "England"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the country location of citizenship of the capital of the country location of the is a list of of arrondissements of the tarn-et-garonne department?", "correct_answer": "United States of America", "model_answer": " [/INST] The country location of the capital of the arrondissement is France. The Tarn-et-Garonne department in France is divided into two arrondissements:\n\n1. Arrondissement of Castelsarrasin: The", "context": "The United States of America (USA), commonly known as the United States (U.S. or US) or America, is a country comprising 50 states, a federal district, five major self-governing territories, and various possessions. At 3.8 million sq mi (9.8 million km2), the United States is the world's third or fourth largest country by total area and is slightly smaller than the entire continent of Europe's 3.93 million sq mi (10.2 million km2). With a population of more than 327 million people, the U.S. is the third most populous country. Most of the country is located contiguously in North America between Canada and Mexico. The extremely diverse geography, climate, and wildlife of the United States make it one of the world's 17 megadiverse countries.Paleo-Indians migrated from Siberia to the North American mainland at least 12,000 years ago. European colonization began in the 16th century. The United States emerged from the thirteen British colonies established along the East Coast. Following the French and Indian War, numerous disputes between Great Britain and the colonies led to the American Revolution, which began in 1775, and the subsequent Declaration of Independence in 1776. The war ended in 1783 with the United States becoming the first country to gain independence from a European power. The current constitution was adopted in 1788, with the first ten amendments, collectively named the Bill of Rights, being ratified in 1791 to guarantee many fundamental civil liberties. The United States embarked on a vigorous expansion across North America throughout the 19th century, acquiring new territories, displacing Native American tribes, and gradually admitting new states until it spanned the continent by 1848.During the second half of the 19th century, the Civil War led to the abolition of slavery. By the end of the century, the United States had extended into the Pacific Ocean, and its economy, driven in large part by the Industrial Revolution, began to soar. The Spanish\u2013American War and World War I confirmed the country's status as a global military power. The United States emerged from World War II as a global superpower and a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council. The end of the Cold War and the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 left the United States as the world's sole superpower.The United States is a federal republic and a representative democracy. It is a founding member of the United Nations, World Bank, International Monetary Fund, Organization of American States (OAS), and many other international organizations. The United States is a highly developed country, with the world's largest economy by nominal GDP and second-largest economy by PPP, accounting for approximately a quarter of global GDP. The U.S. economy is largely post-industrial, characterized by the dominance of services and knowledge-based activities, although the manufacturing sector remains the second-largest in the world. The United States is the world's largest importer and the second largest exporter of goods, by value. Although its population is only 4.3% of the world total, the U.S. holds 31% of the total wealth in the world, the largest share of global wealth concentrated in a single country.Despite income and wealth disparities, the United States continues to rank very high in measures of socioeconomic performance, including average wage, human development, per capita GDP, and worker productivity. The United States is the foremost military power in the world, making up a third of global military spending, and is a leading political, cultural, and scientific force internationally.\nAn arrondissement (French pronunciation: \u200b[a\u0281\u0254\u0303dism\u0251\u0303]) is a level of administrative division in France generally corresponding to the territory overseen by a subprefect. As of 2018, the 101 French departments were divided into 332 arrondissements (including 12 overseas).The capital of an arrondissement is called a subprefecture. When an arrondissement contains the prefecture (capital) of the department, that prefecture is the capital of the arrondissement, acting both as a prefecture and as a subprefecture. Arrondissements are further divided into cantons and communes.The term arrondissement can be roughly translated into English as district.\nHenry of Unna was proctor  of the University of Paris in the 14th century, beginning his term on January 13, 1340. He was preceded as proctor by Conrad of Megenberg. A native of Denmark, Henry of Unna's term as proctor extended until February 10, 1341.He is associated primarily with the publication of a statute of the Faculty of Arts of the University of Paris against Ockhamism.This was issued during his proctorship. Henry of Unna was forced to replace the proctor's seal with a new one in 1341.During his term Henry of Unna led Nicolaus de Dacia to his master's degree and another student, Laurentius de Dacia, to his introductory bachelor's examination. Two years later Nicolaus 'Drukken' de Dacia was promoted to proctor.\nKQUR (branded as Digital 94.9 FM) is a Spanish and English Top 40 format FM station serving the Laredo, Texas, United States and Nuevo Laredo, Tamaulipas, Mexico markets. KQUR's programming was formerly simulcast over local low-power television station KNEX-LP channel 55.\nThe 2 arrondissements of the Tarn-et-Garonne department of France are:Arrondissement of Castelsarrasin, (subprefecture: Castelsarrasin) with 103 communes.  The population of the arrondissement was 76,732 in 2013.Arrondissement of Montauban, (prefecture of the Tarn-et-Garonne department: Montauban) with 92 communes.  The population of the arrondissement was 173,610 in 2013.\nHaplocarpha (onefruit) is a genus of African flowering plants in the daisy family.Species\nOscar Jackson, Jr. (born October 29, 1967), better known by his stage name Paris, is an American rapper from San Francisco, California, known for his highly charged political and socially conscious lyrics. Influenced by the Black Panthers, he was once a member of the Nation of Islam.\nColeophora arctostaphyli is a moth of the family Coleophoridae. It is found from Fennoscandia to the Iberian Peninsula and Italy and from Great Britain to Poland.The wingspan is 12\u201314 mm.The larvae feed on Arctostaphylos uva-ursi. They create a spatulate leaf case of about 8 mm long. The mouth angle is about 45\u00b0. Before making its first case, the young larvae live in a frass-filled contorted corridor. The larval stage lasts two seasons. In the first autumn, they live in a mine, where hibernation occurs. After hibernation, a case is made in which it feeds until spring, then aestivates, feeds in autumn and overwinters for the second time. During the second spring, a new case is made and the larva feeds until April or May when it is full-grown.\nFrance (French: [f\u0281\u0251\u0303s]), officially the French Republic (French: R\u00e9publique fran\u00e7aise, pronounced [\u0281epyblik f\u0281\u0251\u0303s\u025b\u02d0z]), is a sovereign state whose territory consists of metropolitan France in Western Europe and several overseas regions and territories. The metropolitan area of France extends from the Mediterranean Sea to the English Channel and the North Sea, and from the Rhine to the Atlantic Ocean. It is bordered by Belgium, Luxembourg and Germany to the northeast, Switzerland and Italy to the east, and Andorra and Spain to the south. The overseas territories include French Guiana in South America and several islands in the Atlantic, Pacific and Indian oceans. The country's 18 integral regions (five of which are situated overseas) span a combined area of 643,801 square kilometres (248,573 sq mi) and a total population of 67.0 million (as of July 2019). France is a unitary semi-presidential republic with its capital in Paris, the country's largest city and main cultural and commercial centre. Other major urban areas include Lyon, Marseille, Toulouse, Bordeaux, Lille and Nice.During the Iron Age, what is now metropolitan France was inhabited by the Gauls, a Celtic people. Rome annexed the area in 51 BC, holding it until the arrival of Germanic Franks in 476, who formed the Kingdom of Francia. The Treaty of Verdun of 843 partitioned Francia into East Francia, Middle Francia and West Francia. West Francia, which became the Kingdom of France in 987, emerged as a major European power in the Late Middle Ages, following its victory in the Hundred Years' War (1337\u20131453). During the Renaissance, French culture flourished and a global colonial empire was established, which by the 20th century would become the second largest in the world. The 16th century was dominated by religious civil wars between Catholics and Protestants (Huguenots). France became Europe's dominant cultural, political, and military power in the 17th century under Louis XIV. In the late 18th century, the French Revolution overthrew the absolute monarchy, establishing one of modern history's earliest republics and drafting the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen, which expresses the nation's ideals to this day.In the 19th century, Napoleon took power and established the First French Empire. His subsequent Napoleonic Wars (1803\u201315) shaped the course of continental Europe. Following the collapse of the Empire, France endured a tumultuous succession of governments culminating with the establishment of the French Third Republic in 1870. France was a major participant in World War I, from which it emerged victorious, and was one of the Allies in World War II, but came under occupation by the Axis powers in 1940. Following liberation in 1944, a Fourth Republic was established and later dissolved in the course of the Algerian War. The Fifth Republic, led by Charles de Gaulle, was formed in 1958 and remains today. Algeria and nearly all the other colonies became independent in the 1960s, with most retaining close economic and military connections with France.France has long been a global centre of art, science, and philosophy. It hosts the world's fourth-largest number of UNESCO World Heritage Sites and is the leading tourist destination, receiving around 83 million foreign visitors annually. France is a developed country with the world's sixth-largest economy by nominal GDP, and tenth-largest by purchasing power parity. In terms of aggregate household wealth, it ranks fourth in the world. France performs well in international rankings of education, health care, life expectancy, and human development. France is considered a great power in global affairs, being one of the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council with the power to veto and an official nuclear-weapon state. It is a leading member state of the European Union and the Eurozone, and a member of the Group of 7, North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), the World Trade Organization (WTO), and La Francophonie.\n", "path": ["arrondissements of the tarn-et-garonne department", "arrondissement of France", "France", "Paris", "United States of America"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the replaces of the country location of citizenship of hayden andrew penn?", "correct_answer": "the thirteen colonies", "model_answer": " [/INST] Hayden Andrew Penn is an American former professional baseball player. The United States is the country where Hayden Andrew Penn holds citizenship. The United States is located in North America, between Canada and Mexico. It is the third or fourth largest country by", "context": "Polyalthia hirtifolia is a species of plant in the family Annonaceae. It is a tree endemic to Peninsular Malaysia. It is threatened by habitat loss.\nPaul Scheffer-Boichorst (25 May 1843 in Elberfeld \u2013 17 January 1902 in Berlin) was a German historian of the Middle Ages.He studied history at the universities of Innsbruck, G\u00f6ttingen and Berlin, receiving his doctorate from Leipzig University in 1867. Later on, he worked on the Monumenta Germaniae Historica project in Munich and Berlin. In 1875, he became an associate professor of history at the University of Giessen, then relocated to Strasbourg as a full professor during the following year. From 1890 onward, he taught classes at the University of Berlin.He was a member of the Prussian Academy of Sciences. From 1891 to 1902 he was a member of the Central Directorate of the Monumenta Germaniae Historica. He is credited for reconstruction of the Annales Patherbrunnenses.\nThe United States of America (USA), commonly known as the United States (U.S. or US) or America, is a country comprising 50 states, a federal district, five major self-governing territories, and various possessions. At 3.8 million sq mi (9.8 million km2), the United States is the world's third or fourth largest country by total area and is slightly smaller than the entire continent of Europe's 3.93 million sq mi (10.2 million km2). With a population of more than 327 million people, the U.S. is the third most populous country. Most of the country is located contiguously in North America between Canada and Mexico. The extremely diverse geography, climate, and wildlife of the United States make it one of the world's 17 megadiverse countries.Paleo-Indians migrated from Siberia to the North American mainland at least 12,000 years ago. European colonization began in the 16th century. The United States emerged from the thirteen British colonies established along the East Coast. Following the French and Indian War, numerous disputes between Great Britain and the colonies led to the American Revolution, which began in 1775, and the subsequent Declaration of Independence in 1776. The war ended in 1783 with the United States becoming the first country to gain independence from a European power. The current constitution was adopted in 1788, with the first ten amendments, collectively named the Bill of Rights, being ratified in 1791 to guarantee many fundamental civil liberties. The United States embarked on a vigorous expansion across North America throughout the 19th century, acquiring new territories, displacing Native American tribes, and gradually admitting new states until it spanned the continent by 1848.During the second half of the 19th century, the Civil War led to the abolition of slavery. By the end of the century, the United States had extended into the Pacific Ocean, and its economy, driven in large part by the Industrial Revolution, began to soar. The Spanish\u2013American War and World War I confirmed the country's status as a global military power. The United States emerged from World War II as a global superpower and a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council. The end of the Cold War and the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 left the United States as the world's sole superpower.The United States is a federal republic and a representative democracy. It is a founding member of the United Nations, World Bank, International Monetary Fund, Organization of American States (OAS), and many other international organizations. The United States is a highly developed country, with the world's largest economy by nominal GDP and second-largest economy by PPP, accounting for approximately a quarter of global GDP. The U.S. economy is largely post-industrial, characterized by the dominance of services and knowledge-based activities, although the manufacturing sector remains the second-largest in the world. The United States is the world's largest importer and the second largest exporter of goods, by value. Although its population is only 4.3% of the world total, the U.S. holds 31% of the total wealth in the world, the largest share of global wealth concentrated in a single country.Despite income and wealth disparities, the United States continues to rank very high in measures of socioeconomic performance, including average wage, human development, per capita GDP, and worker productivity. The United States is the foremost military power in the world, making up a third of global military spending, and is a leading political, cultural, and scientific force internationally.\nThe Thirteen Colonies, also known as the Thirteen British Colonies or the Thirteen American Colonies, were a group of colonies of Great Britain on the Atlantic coast of America founded in the 17th and 18th centuries which declared independence in 1776 and formed the United States of America. The Thirteen Colonies had very similar political, constitutional, and legal systems and were dominated by Protestant English-speakers. They were part of Britain's possessions in the New World, which also included colonies in Canada, the Caribbean, and Florida.Between 1625 and 1775, the colonial population grew from roughly 2,000 to 2.4 million, displacing American Indians. This population included people subject to a system of slavery which was legal in all of the colonies prior to the American Revolutionary War. In the 18th century, the British government operated its colonies under a policy of mercantilism, in which the central government administered its possessions for the economic benefit of the mother country. The Thirteen Colonies had a high degree of self-governance and active local elections, and they resisted London's demands for more control. The French and Indian War (1754\u201363) against France and its Indian allies led to growing tensions between Britain and the Thirteen Colonies. In the 1750s, the colonies began collaborating with one another instead of dealing directly with Britain. These inter-colonial activities cultivated a sense of shared American identity and led to calls for protection of the colonists' \"Rights as Englishmen\", especially the principle of \"no taxation without representation\". Grievances with the British government led to the American Revolution, in which the colonies collaborated in forming the Continental Congress. The colonists fought the American Revolutionary War (1775\u201383) with the aid of France and, to a significantly smaller degree, the Dutch Republic and Spain.\nMartyn Ian Gidley (born 30 September 1968) is a former English first-class cricketer who played in England and South Africa. Born in Leicester, he was educated at Loughborough Grammar School, where he now is a master.\nCoimbra (, also US: , UK: , Portuguese: [ku\u02c8\u0129b\u027e\u0250] (listen) or [\u02c8kw\u0129b\u027e\u0250]) is a city and a municipality in Portugal. The population at the 2011 census was 143,397, in an area of 319.40 square kilometres (123.3 sq mi).The fourth-largest urban centre in Portugal (after Lisbon, Porto and Braga), it is the largest city of the district of Coimbra and the Centro Region. About 460,000 people live in the Regi\u00e3o de Coimbra, comprising 19 municipalities and extending into an area of 4,336 square kilometres (1,674 sq mi).Among the many archaeological structures dating back to the Roman era, when Coimbra was the settlement of Aeminium, are its well-preserved aqueduct and cryptoporticus. Similarly, buildings from the period when Coimbra was the capital of Portugal (from 1131 to 1255) still remain. During the late Middle Ages, with its decline as the political centre of the Kingdom of Portugal, Coimbra began to evolve into a major cultural centre. This was in large part helped by the establishment of the University of Coimbra in 1290, the oldest academic institution in the Portuguese-speaking world. Apart from attracting many European and international students, the university is visited by many tourists for its monuments and history. Its historical buildings were classified as a World Heritage site by UNESCO in 2013: \"Coimbra offers an outstanding example of an integrated university city with a specific urban typology as well as its own ceremonial and cultural traditions that have been kept alive through the ages.\"\nHayden Andrew Penn (born October 13, 1984) is an American former professional baseball player. He played as right-handed pitcher in Major League Baseball and in the Nippon Professional Baseball league in Japan.\n", "path": ["hayden andrew penn", "United States of America", "the thirteen colonies"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the lowest point of the country location of citizenship of jose antonio gandarillas?", "correct_answer": "Pacific Ocean", "model_answer": " [/INST] The lowest point of the country location of Chilean citizen Juan Jos\u00e9 Gonz\u00e1lez Luco, who is identified as Jos\u00e9 Antonio Gandarillas Luco in the provided context, is not explicitly mentioned in the given text. However, I can tell you", "context": "The 1951 Wisconsin Badgers football team represented the University of Wisconsin in the 1951 Big Ten Conference football season.\nThe Waisoi mine is a large copper mine located in the southern Fiji in Namosi Province. Waisoi represents one of the largest copper reserve in Fiji and in the world having estimated reserves of 950 million tonnes of ore grading 0.43% copper.\nJos\u00e9 Antonio Gandarillas Luco (1839\u20131913) was a Chilean lawyer and politician.\nWilliam Buller Fagg (28 April 1914 \u2013 10 July 1992) was a British curator and anthropologist. He was the Keeper of the Department of Ethnography at the British Museum (1969\u20131974), and pioneering historian of Yoruban and Nigerian art, with a particular focus on the art of Benin.\nThe Pacific Ocean is the largest and deepest of Earth's oceanic divisions. It extends from the Arctic Ocean in the north to the Southern Ocean (or, depending on definition, to Antarctica) in the south and is bounded by Asia and Australia in the west and the Americas in the east.At 165,250,000 square kilometers (63,800,000 square miles) in area (as defined with an Antarctic southern border), this largest division of the World Ocean\u2014and, in turn, the hydrosphere\u2014covers about 46% of Earth's water surface and about one-third of its total surface area, making it larger than all of Earth's land area combined. The centers of both the Water Hemisphere and the Western Hemisphere are in the Pacific Ocean. The equator subdivides it into the North(ern) Pacific Ocean and South(ern) Pacific Ocean, with two exceptions: the Gal\u00e1pagos and Gilbert Islands, while straddling the equator, are deemed wholly within the South Pacific. Its mean depth is 4,000 meters (13,000 feet). The Mariana Trench in the western North Pacific is the deepest point in the world, reaching a depth of 10,911 meters (35,797 feet). The western Pacific has many peripheral seas.Though the peoples of Asia and Oceania have traveled the Pacific Ocean since prehistoric times, the eastern Pacific was first sighted by Europeans in the early 16th century when Spanish explorer Vasco N\u00fa\u00f1ez de Balboa crossed the Isthmus of Panama in 1513 and discovered the great \"southern sea\" which he named Mar del Sur (in Spanish). The ocean's current name was coined by Portuguese explorer Ferdinand Magellan during the Spanish circumnavigation of the world in 1521, as he encountered favorable winds on reaching the ocean. He called it Mar Pac\u00edfico, which in both Portuguese and Spanish means \"peaceful sea\".\nChile ( (listen), ; Spanish: [\u02c8t\u0283ile]), officially the Republic of Chile (Spanish: Rep\u00fablica de Chile ), is a South American country occupying a long, narrow strip of land between the Andes to the east and the Pacific Ocean to the west. It borders Peru to the north, Bolivia to the northeast, Argentina to the east, and the Drake Passage in the far south. Chilean territory includes the Pacific islands of Juan Fern\u00e1ndez, Salas y G\u00f3mez, Desventuradas, and Easter Island in Oceania. Chile also claims about 1,250,000 square kilometres (480,000 sq mi) of Antarctica, although all claims are suspended under the Antarctic Treaty.The arid Atacama Desert in northern Chile contains great mineral wealth, principally copper and lithium. The relatively small central area dominates in terms of population and agricultural resources, and is the cultural and political center from which Chile expanded in the late 19th century when it incorporated its northern and southern regions. Southern Chile is rich in forests and grazing lands, and features a string of volcanoes and lakes. The southern coast is a labyrinth of fjords, inlets, canals, twisting peninsulas, and islands.Spain conquered and colonized the region in the mid-16th century, replacing Inca rule in the north and centre, but failing to conquer the independent Mapuche who inhabited what is now south-central Chile. After declaring its independence from Spain in 1818, Chile emerged in the 1830s as a relatively stable authoritarian republic. In the 19th century, Chile saw significant economic and territorial growth, ending Mapuche resistance in the 1880s and gaining its current northern territory in the War of the Pacific (1879\u201383) after defeating Peru and Bolivia. In the 1960s and 1970s, the country experienced severe left-right political polarization and turmoil. This development culminated with the 1973 Chilean coup d'\u00e9tat that overthrew Salvador Allende's democratically elected left-wing government and instituted a 16-year-long right-wing military dictatorship that left more than 3,000 people dead or missing. The regime, headed by Augusto Pinochet, ended in 1990 after it lost a referendum in 1988 and was succeeded by a center-left coalition which ruled through four presidencies until 2010.The modern sovereign state of Chile is among South America's most economically and socially stable and prosperous nations, with a high-income economy and high living standards. It leads Latin American nations in rankings of human development, competitiveness, income per capita, globalization, state of peace, economic freedom, and low perception of corruption. It also ranks high regionally in sustainability of the state, and democratic development. Chile is a member of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), joining in 2010. Currently it also has the lowest homicide rate in the Americas after Canada. Chile is a founding member of the United Nations, the Union of South American Nations (UNASUR), the Community of Latin American and Caribbean States (CELAC) and the Pacific Alliance.\nIlaria Salvatori (born 5 February 1979 in Frascati) is an Italian foil fencer.\n", "path": ["jose antonio gandarillas", "Chile", "Pacific Ocean"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the official language of the country location of w238bj?", "correct_answer": "English", "model_answer": " [/INST] The official language of the country location of W238BJ is English.\n\nThe context provides a detailed description of English as a language and its spread around the world. However, it does not explicitly state the country location of W2", "context": "Baruti is a surname. Notable people with the surname include:Barly Baruti (born 1959), Congolese cartoonistMustafa Baruti, Albanian politician\nEnglish is a West Germanic language that was first spoken in early medieval England and eventually became a global lingua franca. It is named after the Angles, one of the Germanic tribes that migrated to the area of Great Britain that later took their name, as England. Both names derive from Anglia, a peninsula in the Baltic Sea. The language is closely related to Frisian and Low Saxon, and its vocabulary has been significantly influenced by other Germanic languages, particularly Norse (a North Germanic language), and to a greater extent by Latin and French.English has developed over the course of more than 1,400 years. The earliest forms of English, a group of West Germanic (Ingvaeonic) dialects brought to Great Britain by Anglo-Saxon settlers in the 5th century, are collectively called Old English. Middle English began in the late 11th century with the Norman conquest of England; this was a period in which the language was influenced by French. Early Modern English began in the late 15th century with the introduction of the printing press to London, the printing of the King James Bible and the start of the Great Vowel Shift.Through the worldwide influence of the British Empire, and later the United States, Modern English has been spreading around the world since the 17th century. Through all types of printed and electronic media, and spurred by the emergence of the United States as a global superpower, English has become the leading language of international discourse and the lingua franca in many regions and professional contexts such as science, navigation and law.English is the largest language by number of speakers, and the third most-spoken native language in the world, after Standard Chinese and Spanish. It is the most widely learned second language and is either the official language or one of the official languages in almost 60 sovereign states. There are more people who have learned it as a second language than there are native speakers. It is estimated that there are over 2 billion speakers of English. English is the most commonly spoken language in the United Kingdom, the United States, Canada, Australia, Ireland and New Zealand, and it is widely spoken in some areas of the Caribbean, Africa and South Asia. It is a co-official language of the United Nations, the European Union and many other world and regional international organisations. It is the most widely spoken Germanic language, accounting for at least 70% of speakers of this Indo-European branch. English has a vast vocabulary, though counting how many words any language has is impossible. English speakers are called \"Anglophones\".Modern English grammar is the result of a gradual change from a typical Indo-European dependent marking pattern, with a rich inflectional morphology and relatively free word order, to a mostly analytic pattern with little inflection, a fairly fixed SVO word order and a complex syntax. Modern English relies more on auxiliary verbs and word order for the expression of complex tenses, aspect and mood, as well as passive constructions, interrogatives and some negation. The variation among the accents and dialects of English used in different countries and regions\u2014in terms of phonetics and phonology, and sometimes also vocabulary, grammar, and spelling\u2014can often be understood by speakers of different dialects, but in extreme cases can lead to confusion or even mutual unintelligibility between English speakers.\nW238BJ (95.5 FM) is a commercial radio translator licensed to Mt. Auburn, Ohio providing limited coverage to northern parts of Greater Cincinnati.  Owned by EMF Broadcasting, Inc., W238BJ formerly simulcast the alternative rock format heard on WEBN-HD2 under the callsign W292DT at 106.3 FM.\nSinduriya is a village in Barun. More than 60 households compose the town's ethnic Rajput  majority. There are no castes banned from the village.Chitranjan Kumar Singh is from this village.He is an Engineer in Malaysia.and Ajit Singh administration manager of UP. In HDB FinanceThis villages has lots of popular personalites:1.Lal bihari Singh (work in Delhi 2. Anjani Kumar Singh (NTPC Contractor).3. Ranjay Singh (Mukhiya Ji)4. Jitendra Yadav (IAF).5. Arvind & Randhir Singh. (BSF).6.Ajit Singh. HDB assistance Manager of Up and see hole Up. Uttarakhand. this villagers has their own land in Sinduriya. The village hosts the Devi temple.Population of sinduriya is:545.\nThe Philadelphia Transportation Company (PTC) was the main public transit operator in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, from 1940 to 1968.  A private company, PTC was the successor to the Philadelphia Rapid Transit Company (PRT), in operation since 1902, and was the immediate predecessor of the Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority (SEPTA).\nThe United States of America (USA), commonly known as the United States (U.S. or US) or America, is a country comprising 50 states, a federal district, five major self-governing territories, and various possessions. At 3.8 million sq mi (9.8 million km2), the United States is the world's third or fourth largest country by total area and is slightly smaller than the entire continent of Europe's 3.93 million sq mi (10.2 million km2). With a population of more than 327 million people, the U.S. is the third most populous country. Most of the country is located contiguously in North America between Canada and Mexico. The extremely diverse geography, climate, and wildlife of the United States make it one of the world's 17 megadiverse countries.Paleo-Indians migrated from Siberia to the North American mainland at least 12,000 years ago. European colonization began in the 16th century. The United States emerged from the thirteen British colonies established along the East Coast. Following the French and Indian War, numerous disputes between Great Britain and the colonies led to the American Revolution, which began in 1775, and the subsequent Declaration of Independence in 1776. The war ended in 1783 with the United States becoming the first country to gain independence from a European power. The current constitution was adopted in 1788, with the first ten amendments, collectively named the Bill of Rights, being ratified in 1791 to guarantee many fundamental civil liberties. The United States embarked on a vigorous expansion across North America throughout the 19th century, acquiring new territories, displacing Native American tribes, and gradually admitting new states until it spanned the continent by 1848.During the second half of the 19th century, the Civil War led to the abolition of slavery. By the end of the century, the United States had extended into the Pacific Ocean, and its economy, driven in large part by the Industrial Revolution, began to soar. The Spanish\u2013American War and World War I confirmed the country's status as a global military power. The United States emerged from World War II as a global superpower and a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council. The end of the Cold War and the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 left the United States as the world's sole superpower.The United States is a federal republic and a representative democracy. It is a founding member of the United Nations, World Bank, International Monetary Fund, Organization of American States (OAS), and many other international organizations. The United States is a highly developed country, with the world's largest economy by nominal GDP and second-largest economy by PPP, accounting for approximately a quarter of global GDP. The U.S. economy is largely post-industrial, characterized by the dominance of services and knowledge-based activities, although the manufacturing sector remains the second-largest in the world. The United States is the world's largest importer and the second largest exporter of goods, by value. Although its population is only 4.3% of the world total, the U.S. holds 31% of the total wealth in the world, the largest share of global wealth concentrated in a single country.Despite income and wealth disparities, the United States continues to rank very high in measures of socioeconomic performance, including average wage, human development, per capita GDP, and worker productivity. The United States is the foremost military power in the world, making up a third of global military spending, and is a leading political, cultural, and scientific force internationally.\nThe volcano junco (Junco vulcani) is an American sparrow endemic to the Talamancan montane forests of Costa Rica and western Panama.This junco breeds above the timberline, typically at altitudes above 3000 m, but there is an isolated population at 2100 m on the Caribbean slope of Costa Rica, and forest clearance on Cerro de la Muerte has allowed this species to descend to 2600 m. The habitat is open grassy or brushy areas with some stunted scrubs. The nest is a neat lined cup constructed on the ground under a log, bush or rock, or in a cavity on a vegetated bank. The female lays two brown-spotted pale blue eggs.The volcano junco is on average 16 cm long and weighs 28 g. The adult has brown upperparts with dark streaking especially on the back. The wings and tail feathers are dark fringed. The underparts are grey. The sides of the head are grey with a black mask through the eye, a yellow iris, and a pink bill and legs. Young birds are brighter brown above with blacker streaking, and have buff-grey underparts.Volcano junco calls include a thin tseee or a clearer wheew. The song is a mixture of squeaks and buzzes; k\u2019chew chu k\u2019wee chip chip chueee.The volcano junco feeds on the ground on seeds, fallen berries, insects and spiders. It runs and hops, but flies only short distances.\n", "path": ["w238bj", "United States of America", "English"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the replaces of the country location of the languages spoken, written, or signed of ezrahite?", "correct_answer": "Mandatory Palestine", "model_answer": " [/INST] The Ezrahites were an ancient Israelite priestly family mentioned in the Hebrew Bible. The name \"Ezrahite\" comes from the Israeli tribe of Ezra. It is not explicitly mentioned where the Ezrahites were originally located.", "context": "Mandatory Palestine (Arabic: \u0641\u0644\u0633\u0637\u064a\u0646\u200e Filas\u1e6d\u012bn; Hebrew: \u05e4\u05b8\u05bc\u05dc\u05b6\u05e9\u05b0\u05c2\u05ea\u05b4\u05bc\u05d9\u05e0\u05b8\u05d4 (\u05d0\"\u05d9) P\u0101l\u0113\u015bt\u012bn\u0101 (EY), where \"EY\" indicates \"Eretz Yisrael\", Land of Israel) was a geopolitical entity established between 1920 and 1923 in the Middle East roughly corresponding to the region of Palestine, as part of the Partition of the Ottoman Empire under the terms of the \"Mandate for Palestine\".During the First World War (1914\u201318), an Arab uprising and the British Empire's Egyptian Expeditionary Force under General Edmund Allenby drove the Turks out of the Levant during the Sinai and Palestine Campaign. The United Kingdom had agreed in the McMahon\u2013Hussein Correspondence that it would honour Arab independence if they revolted against the Ottomans, but the two sides had different interpretations of this agreement, and in the end, the UK and France divided up the area under the Sykes\u2013Picot Agreement\u2014an act of betrayal in the eyes of the Arabs. Further complicating the issue was the Balfour Declaration of 1917, promising British support for a Jewish \"national home\" in Palestine. At the war's end the British and French set up a joint  \"Occupied Enemy Territory Administration\" in what had been Ottoman Syria. The British achieved legitimacy for their continued control by obtaining a mandate from the League of Nations in June 1922. The formal objective of the League of Nations mandate system was to administer parts of the defunct Ottoman Empire, which had been in control of the Middle East since the 16th century, \"until such time as they are able to stand alone.\" The civil Mandate administration was formalized with the League of Nations' consent in 1923 under the British Mandate for Palestine, which covered two administrative areas.During the British Mandate period the area experienced the ascent of two major nationalist movements, one among the Jews and the other among the Arabs. The competing national interests of the Arab and Jewish populations of Palestine against each other and against the governing British authorities matured into the Arab Revolt of 1936\u20131939 and the Jewish insurgency in Mandatory Palestine, before culminating in the Civil War of 1947\u20131948. The aftermath of the Civil War and the consequent 1948 Arab\u2013Israeli War led to the establishment of the 1949 cease-fire agreement, with partition of the former Mandatory Palestine between the newborn state of Israel with a Jewish majority, the Arab West Bank annexed by the Jordanian Kingdom and the Arab All-Palestine Protectorate in the Gaza Strip under Egypt.\nJean-Clement Martin, born on 31 January 1948, is a French historian, a specialist in the French Revolution, Counter-revolution and the War in the Vend\u00e9e. He was a pupil of Emmanuel Le Roy Ladurie. From 2000-2008 he was the director of the Institute for the history of the French Revolution, a center of academic research and teaching, connected to Pantheon-Sorbonne University. Since then he is professor emeritus. In 2016, he categorically denies (calling it \"sacrificial\"), the interpretation of the \"Marseillaise\" that \"qu'un sang impur abreuve nos sillons!\" (Let an impure blood water our furrows!) means in truth that the F\u00e9d\u00e9r\u00e9s of 1792 were proud to pour their own blood for their homeland.\nIsrael (; Hebrew: \u05d9\u05b4\u05e9\u05b0\u05c2\u05e8\u05b8\u05d0\u05b5\u05dc; Arabic: \u0625\u0650\u0633\u0652\u0631\u064e\u0627\u0626\u0650\u064a\u0644\u200e), also known as the State of Israel, is a country in Western Asia, located on the southeastern shore of the Mediterranean Sea and the northern shore of the Red Sea. It has land borders with Lebanon to the north, Syria to the northeast, Jordan on the east, the Palestinian territories of the West Bank and Gaza Strip to the east and west, respectively, and Egypt to the southwest. The country contains geographically diverse features within its relatively small area. Israel's economic and technological center is Tel Aviv, while its seat of government and proclaimed capital is Jerusalem, although the state's sovereignty over Jerusalem has only partial recognition.Israel has evidence of the earliest migration of hominids out of Africa. Canaanite tribes are archaeologically attested since the Middle Bronze Age, while the Kingdoms of Israel and Judah emerged during the Iron Age. The Neo-Assyrian Empire destroyed Israel around 720 BCE. Judah was later conquered by the Babylonian, Persian and Hellenistic empires and had existed as Jewish autonomous provinces. The successful Maccabean Revolt led to an independent Hasmonean kingdom by 110 BCE, which in 63 BCE however became a client state of the Roman Republic that subsequently installed the Herodian dynasty in 37 BCE, and in 6 CE created the Roman province of Judea. Judea lasted as a Roman province until the failed Jewish revolts resulted in widespread destruction, the expulsion of the Jewish population and the renaming of the region from Iudaea to Syria Palaestina. Jewish presence in the region has persisted to a certain extent over the centuries. In the 7th century CE, the Levant was taken from the Byzantine Empire by the Arabs and remained in Muslim control until the First Crusade of 1099, followed by the Ayyubid conquest of 1187. The Mamluk Sultanate of Egypt extended its control over the Levant in the 13th century until its defeat by the Ottoman Empire in 1517. During the 19th century, national awakening among Jews led to the establishment of the Zionist movement in the diaspora followed by waves of immigration to Ottoman Syria and later Mandatory Palestine.In 1947, the United Nations (UN) adopted a Partition Plan for Palestine recommending the creation of independent Arab and Jewish states and an internationalized Jerusalem. The plan was accepted by the Jewish Agency, and rejected by Arab leaders. The following year, the Jewish Agency declared the independence of the State of Israel, and the subsequent 1948 Arab\u2013Israeli War saw Israel's establishment over most of the former Mandate territory, while the West Bank and Gaza were held by neighboring Arab states. Israel has since fought several wars with Arab countries, and since the Six-Day War in 1967 held occupied territories including the West Bank, Golan Heights and the Gaza Strip (still considered occupied after the 2005 disengagement, although some legal experts dispute this claim). It extended its laws to the Golan Heights and East Jerusalem, but not the West Bank. Israel's occupation of the Palestinian territories is the world's longest military occupation in modern times. Efforts to resolve the Israeli\u2013Palestinian conflict have not resulted in a final peace agreement. However, peace treaties between Israel and both Egypt and Jordan have been signed.In its Basic Laws, Israel defines itself as a Jewish and democratic state and the nation state of the Jewish people. The country has a liberal democracy (one of only two in the Middle East and North Africa region, the other being Tunisia), with a parliamentary system, proportional representation, and universal suffrage. The prime minister is head of government and the Knesset is the legislature. With a population of around 9 million as of 2019, Israel is a developed country and an Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) member, and has the 31st or 32nd-largest economy in the world by nominal gross domestic product (GDP). Israel has the highest standard of living in the Middle East, and ranks among the world's top countries by percentage of citizens with military training, percentage of citizens holding a tertiary education degree, research and development spending by GDP percentage, women's safety, life expectancy, innovativeness, and happiness.\nVanier Park is a municipal park located in the Kitsilano neighbourhood of Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. It is home to the Museum of Vancouver, the Vancouver Maritime Museum, the City of Vancouver Archives, and the H.R. MacMillan Space Centre.\nThomas Megarry, JP (born 1898, date of death unknown) was a Hong Kong civil servant and acting Secretary for Chinese Affairs, a key adviser on Chinese politics and culture.\nDia Toutinji (Arabic: \u0636\u064a\u0627\u0621 \u062a\u0648\u062a\u0646\u062c\u064a\u200e; born May 3, 1960) is a Syrian Olympic athlete. She represented Syria in 1980 Summer Olympics in Moscow.\nHebrew (; \u05e2\u05b4\u05d1\u05b0\u05e8\u05b4\u05d9\u05ea\u200e, Ivrit Hebrew pronunciation: [iv\u02c8\u0281it] or [\u0295iv\u02c8\u027eit] (listen)) is a Northwest Semitic language native to Israel; the modern version of which is spoken by over 9 million people worldwide. Historically, it is regarded as the language of the Israelites and their ancestors, although the language was not referred to by the name Hebrew in the Tanakh itself. The earliest examples of written Paleo-Hebrew date from the 10th century BCE. Hebrew belongs to the West Semitic branch of the Afroasiatic language family. Hebrew is the only living Canaanite language left, and the only truly successful example of a revived dead language.Hebrew had ceased to be an everyday spoken language somewhere between 200 and 400 CE, declining since the aftermath of the Bar Kokhba revolt. Aramaic and to a lesser extent Greek were already in use as international languages, especially among elites and immigrants. Hebrew survived into the medieval period as the language of Jewish liturgy, rabbinic literature, intra-Jewish commerce, and poetry. Then, in the 19th century, it was revived as a spoken and literary language. It became the lingua franca of Palestine's Jews, and subsequently of the State of Israel. According to Ethnologue, in 1998, it was the language of 5 million people worldwide. After Israel, the United States has the second largest Hebrew-speaking population, with about 220,000 fluent speakers, mostly from Israel.Modern Hebrew is the official language of the State of Israel, while premodern Hebrew is used for prayer or study in Jewish communities around the world today. The Samaritan dialect is also the liturgical tongue of the Samaritans, while modern Hebrew or Arabic is their vernacular. As a foreign language, it is studied mostly by Jews and students of Judaism and Israel, and by archaeologists and linguists specializing in the Middle East and its civilizations, as well as by theologians in Christian seminaries.The Torah (the first five books), and most of the rest of the Hebrew Bible, is written in Biblical Hebrew, with much of its present form specifically in the dialect that scholars believe flourished around the 6th century BCE, around the time of the Babylonian captivity. For this reason, Hebrew has been referred to by Jews as Lashon Hakodesh (\u05dc\u05e9\u05d5\u05df \u05d4\u05e7\u05d5\u05d3\u05e9), \"the Holy Language\", since ancient times.\nEthan (Hebrew: \u05d0\u05b5\u05d9\u05ea\u05b8\u05df, Modern: Eytan / Eitan, Tiberian: \u02be\u00ca\u1e6f\u0101n, \"Firm\") the Ezrahite, is mentioned in the Hebrew Bible. It may be that Ethan was a cymbal-player in King David's court. He authored Psalm 89. Charles Spurgeon theorised that this was the same person as Jeduthun. Theologian John Gill refers to a Jewish tradition which identifies Ethan with Abraham, Heman with Moses, and Chalcol with Joseph.Ethan means strong and optimistic, solid and enduring; permanent. The name Ethan appears eight times in the Hebrew Bible (1 Kings 4:31, Ps. 89 title, 1 Chr. 2:6 and 2:8, 1 Chr. 6:42 and 6:44, and 1 Chr. 15:17 and 15:19).He was a standard of wisdom to whom King Solomon is compared favorably.Called there \"Ethan the Ezrahite,\" to whom the title of Psalm 89 ascribes the authorship of that poem.A \"son of Kishi,\" or \"Kishaiah,\" of the Merari branch of Levites, and, also with Heman and Asaph, placed by David over the service of song (1 Chronicles 6:44; 1 Chronicles 15:17, 19).An ancestor of Asaph of the Gershomite branch of the Levites (1 Chronicles 6:42).\n", "path": ["ezrahite", "Hebrew", "Israel", "Mandatory Palestine"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the country location of soulom?", "correct_answer": "France", "model_answer": " [/INST] The term \"Soulom\" is not mentioned in the context provided. It is a commune in the Hautes-Pyr\u00e9n\u00e9es department in south-western France, as stated in the beginning, but there is no further detail about its", "context": "Rikuzen-Ochiai Station (\u9678\u524d\u843d\u5408\u99c5, Rikuzen-Ochiai-eki) is a railway station on the Senzan Line in Aoba-ku, Sendai in Miyagi Prefecture, Japan, operated by East Japan Railway Company (JR East).\nSoulom is a commune in the Hautes-Pyr\u00e9n\u00e9es department in south-western France.\nJos\u00e9 Luis Marello (born September 8, 1965) is an Argentine sprint canoer. He competed in the late 1980s and early 1990s.At the 1988 Summer Olympics in Seoul, Marello was eliminated in the repechages of both the K-2 500 m and K-4 1000 m events. Four years later in Barcelona, he was eliminated in the semifinals of the K-4 1000 m event.\nChris Hopewell is an English music video director and screenprinted poster maker. He has directed videos for Radiohead, Franz Ferdinand, The Killers, Scissor Sisters, Louis XIV, The Knife, The Offspring and several other bands. His video for Radiohead's \"There There\" received an award for art direction at the 2003 MTV Video Music Awards. Hopewell co-founded the company Collision Films (2002 - 2012).He also co-directed with Crispian Mills on the film A Fantastic Fear of Everything starring Simon Pegg. His most recent work is directing the music video for Avenged Sevenfold's 2016 single, \"The Stage\".\nThe Peugeot Citroen H2Origin is an urban delivery vehicle powered by a fuel cell and electric powertrain.  A fuel cell of 20 kilowatts (27 hp) powered by 4 kg (8.8 lb) of compressed hydrogen at 700 bars in a tank carbon composite, recharges a battery pack capable of providing 15 kWh.\nFrance (French: [f\u0281\u0251\u0303s]), officially the French Republic (French: R\u00e9publique fran\u00e7aise, pronounced [\u0281epyblik f\u0281\u0251\u0303s\u025b\u02d0z]), is a sovereign state whose territory consists of metropolitan France in Western Europe and several overseas regions and territories. The metropolitan area of France extends from the Mediterranean Sea to the English Channel and the North Sea, and from the Rhine to the Atlantic Ocean. It is bordered by Belgium, Luxembourg and Germany to the northeast, Switzerland and Italy to the east, and Andorra and Spain to the south. The overseas territories include French Guiana in South America and several islands in the Atlantic, Pacific and Indian oceans. The country's 18 integral regions (five of which are situated overseas) span a combined area of 643,801 square kilometres (248,573 sq mi) and a total population of 67.0 million (as of July 2019). France is a unitary semi-presidential republic with its capital in Paris, the country's largest city and main cultural and commercial centre. Other major urban areas include Lyon, Marseille, Toulouse, Bordeaux, Lille and Nice.During the Iron Age, what is now metropolitan France was inhabited by the Gauls, a Celtic people. Rome annexed the area in 51 BC, holding it until the arrival of Germanic Franks in 476, who formed the Kingdom of Francia. The Treaty of Verdun of 843 partitioned Francia into East Francia, Middle Francia and West Francia. West Francia, which became the Kingdom of France in 987, emerged as a major European power in the Late Middle Ages, following its victory in the Hundred Years' War (1337\u20131453). During the Renaissance, French culture flourished and a global colonial empire was established, which by the 20th century would become the second largest in the world. The 16th century was dominated by religious civil wars between Catholics and Protestants (Huguenots). France became Europe's dominant cultural, political, and military power in the 17th century under Louis XIV. In the late 18th century, the French Revolution overthrew the absolute monarchy, establishing one of modern history's earliest republics and drafting the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen, which expresses the nation's ideals to this day.In the 19th century, Napoleon took power and established the First French Empire. His subsequent Napoleonic Wars (1803\u201315) shaped the course of continental Europe. Following the collapse of the Empire, France endured a tumultuous succession of governments culminating with the establishment of the French Third Republic in 1870. France was a major participant in World War I, from which it emerged victorious, and was one of the Allies in World War II, but came under occupation by the Axis powers in 1940. Following liberation in 1944, a Fourth Republic was established and later dissolved in the course of the Algerian War. The Fifth Republic, led by Charles de Gaulle, was formed in 1958 and remains today. Algeria and nearly all the other colonies became independent in the 1960s, with most retaining close economic and military connections with France.France has long been a global centre of art, science, and philosophy. It hosts the world's fourth-largest number of UNESCO World Heritage Sites and is the leading tourist destination, receiving around 83 million foreign visitors annually. France is a developed country with the world's sixth-largest economy by nominal GDP, and tenth-largest by purchasing power parity. In terms of aggregate household wealth, it ranks fourth in the world. France performs well in international rankings of education, health care, life expectancy, and human development. France is considered a great power in global affairs, being one of the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council with the power to veto and an official nuclear-weapon state. It is a leading member state of the European Union and the Eurozone, and a member of the Group of 7, North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), the World Trade Organization (WTO), and La Francophonie.\n", "path": ["soulom", "France"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the continent of the indigenous to of the official language of the country location of kenmare municipal airport?", "correct_answer": "Europe", "model_answer": " [/INST] The official language of the country located near Kenmare Municipal Airport is English. English is not indigenous to any single continent but has evolved from a group of West Germanic dialects brought to Great Britain by Anglo-Saxon settlers in", "context": "Zig & Sharko is a French animated slapstick comedy television series created and directed by Olivier Jean-Marie and produced by Xilam Animation. It chronicles the conflict between Zig, a brown hyena, and Sharko, a great white shark, who live on a volcanic island. The conflict is fueled by Zig's constant attempts to eat the mermaid Marina, whom Sharko loves. The series employs silent comedy: characters either do not speak, or use unintelligible vocalizations, gestures, and occasional pictograms in speech balloons. (The Indian version dubs Hindi dialogue over the animation.) Two seasons with a total of 52 half-hour episodes (156 seven-minute segments) were originally broadcast from December 21, 2010 on Canal+. The series is available for streaming in the United States on Netflix (season 1 until September 2017, season 2 currently).A third season was announced in December 2018.\nZarrin Choqa (Persian: \u0632\u0631\u064a\u0646 \u0686\u0642\u0627\u200e, also Romanized as Zarr\u012bn Choq\u0101) is a village in Hasanabad Rural District, in the Central District of Ravansar County, Kermanshah Province, Iran. At the 2006 census, its population was 252, in 55 families.\nKenmare Municipal Airport (FAA LID: 7K5) is a mile southeast of Kenmare, in Ward County, North Dakota. The National Plan of Integrated Airport Systems for 2011\u20132015 categorized it as a general aviation facility.\nEnglish is a West Germanic language that was first spoken in early medieval England and eventually became a global lingua franca. It is named after the Angles, one of the Germanic tribes that migrated to the area of Great Britain that later took their name, as England. Both names derive from Anglia, a peninsula in the Baltic Sea. The language is closely related to Frisian and Low Saxon, and its vocabulary has been significantly influenced by other Germanic languages, particularly Norse (a North Germanic language), and to a greater extent by Latin and French.English has developed over the course of more than 1,400 years. The earliest forms of English, a group of West Germanic (Ingvaeonic) dialects brought to Great Britain by Anglo-Saxon settlers in the 5th century, are collectively called Old English. Middle English began in the late 11th century with the Norman conquest of England; this was a period in which the language was influenced by French. Early Modern English began in the late 15th century with the introduction of the printing press to London, the printing of the King James Bible and the start of the Great Vowel Shift.Through the worldwide influence of the British Empire, and later the United States, Modern English has been spreading around the world since the 17th century. Through all types of printed and electronic media, and spurred by the emergence of the United States as a global superpower, English has become the leading language of international discourse and the lingua franca in many regions and professional contexts such as science, navigation and law.English is the largest language by number of speakers, and the third most-spoken native language in the world, after Standard Chinese and Spanish. It is the most widely learned second language and is either the official language or one of the official languages in almost 60 sovereign states. There are more people who have learned it as a second language than there are native speakers. It is estimated that there are over 2 billion speakers of English. English is the most commonly spoken language in the United Kingdom, the United States, Canada, Australia, Ireland and New Zealand, and it is widely spoken in some areas of the Caribbean, Africa and South Asia. It is a co-official language of the United Nations, the European Union and many other world and regional international organisations. It is the most widely spoken Germanic language, accounting for at least 70% of speakers of this Indo-European branch. English has a vast vocabulary, though counting how many words any language has is impossible. English speakers are called \"Anglophones\".Modern English grammar is the result of a gradual change from a typical Indo-European dependent marking pattern, with a rich inflectional morphology and relatively free word order, to a mostly analytic pattern with little inflection, a fairly fixed SVO word order and a complex syntax. Modern English relies more on auxiliary verbs and word order for the expression of complex tenses, aspect and mood, as well as passive constructions, interrogatives and some negation. The variation among the accents and dialects of English used in different countries and regions\u2014in terms of phonetics and phonology, and sometimes also vocabulary, grammar, and spelling\u2014can often be understood by speakers of different dialects, but in extreme cases can lead to confusion or even mutual unintelligibility between English speakers.\nRandy Soderman is a retired American soccer player and technology entrepreneur who has founded multiple tech companies including Soderman Marketing & Glass Shop Go (Auto Glass Software).The younger brother of Rick Soderman, Randy played for CISCO Soccer Club in Phoenix growing up.  In 1992, he graduated from Cactus High School.  That year, he joined the Arizona Cotton for the 1992\u201393 USISL indoor season.  Soderman attended Glendale Community College where he was a 1993 NJCAA Second Team All American.  In the summer of 1994, Soderman played outdoors with the Arizona Cotton.  That fall, he entered Grand Canyon University, playing one season on the men\u2019s soccer team.  In 1995, he turned professional with the Arizona Sandsharks of the Continental Indoor Soccer League.  That fall, he signed with the Chicago Power of the National Professional Soccer League.  In the summer of 1996, he continued to play indoor summer soccer with the Sacramento Knights of the CISL.  In 1998 and 1999, Soderman played for the Arizona Sahuaros of the USL D-3 Pro League, then returned to indoor summer soccer in 1999 with the Arizona Thunder of the World Indoor Soccer League where he won the WISL Defender of the Year award.  In 2000 and 2001, he was with the Tucson Fireballs in the USL D-3 Pro League.  In 2004, Soderman returned indoors with the St. Louis Steamers of the Major Indoor Soccer League.  He played two season with the Steamers where he was voted to the MISL All-Star team in both years.  In 2006, the Steamers folded and the Milwaukee Wave selected Soderman as their first overall pick in the Dispersal Draft. That same year, Soderman was called up to the United States national futsal team.   On October 17, 2006, the Milwaukee Wave went Soderman and Alen Osmanovic to the Chicago Power in exchange for Anthony Maher and Tijani Ayegbusi.  The two seasons he spent with the Storm were the last two professional seasons Soderman played.  In 2007, he returned to the Arizona Sahuaros, now playing in the National Premier Soccer League.  In 2009, the Sahuaros played in the United States Adult Soccer Association.  On August 13, 2012, the Tucson Extreme of the Professional Arena Soccer League signed Soderman as head coach.  In September, the team announced it would delay its first season and Soderman signed with Real Phoenix FC in the Professional Arena Soccer League.Randy Soderman retired from Soccer in 2008 and entered into the technology industry where he founded Soderman Marketing & Xtraman Fundraising. Successful digital marketing campaigns by Soderman Marketing lead to Soderman launching Dealer Auto Glass of Arizona and Dealer Auto Glass of Denver in 2012. In 2016, Soderman launched Elite Web Design of Phoenix as an extension of Soderman Marketing. With extensive experience in the technology industry, later 2016 Soderman co-founded and launched an auto glass software company called Glass Shop Go. Soderman and partners built Glass Shop Go in order to revolutionize the auto glass software industry. Late 2016 Soderman was first mentioned in Forbes and Inc Magazine.\nEurope is a Swedish rock band formed in Upplands V\u00e4sby in 1979,  by vocalist Joey Tempest, guitarist John Norum, bassist Peter Olsson, and drummer Tony Reno. They got a major breakthrough in Sweden in 1982 by winning the televised competition \"Rock-SM\" (Swedish Rock Championships): it was the first time this competition was held, and Europe became a larger success than the competition itself.Since their formation, Europe has released eleven studio albums, three live albums, three compilations and twenty-four music videos.Europe rose to international fame in the 1980s with their third album, 1986's The Final Countdown, which has sold over 3 million copies in the United States and 15 million copies worldwide (including album and single). Europe have sold over 25 million records worldwide.  The band has had two top 20 albums on the Billboard 200 chart (The Final Countdown  and Out of This World) and three top 30 singles on the Billboard Hot 100 chart (\"The Final Countdown\", \"Rock the Night\" and \"Carrie\").Europe went on hiatus in 1992, reunited temporarily for a one-off performance in Stockholm on New Year's Eve 1999 and announced an official reunion in 2003. Since then the band has released six albums, Start from the Dark (2004), Secret Society (2006), Last Look at Eden (2009), Bag of Bones (2012), War of Kings (2015) and Walk the Earth (2017).Europe has achieved new attention in the US due to being featured in a GEICO Insurance cable television commercial campaign viewed for many months across the US in 2015\u201316.The band is mainly influenced by Whitesnake, Deep Purple, Rainbow, Led Zeppelin, Thin Lizzy, UFO and Michael Schenker Group.\nBrunel Rugby League are a student rugby league club from Uxbridge, West London, England. The club play in the SRL London/South.The club were reformed in Winter 2007 after a ten-year hiatus. From the very beginning close links were formed with the Rugby Football League and Harlequins RL. The latter oversaw the new side as they found their feet, ensuring that the coaching was of a suitable standard and promoting the team both on campus, and through their website until a good group of players were there to build on.After six months under the affiliation of the London Amateur Rugby League, the club completed its first three games (which included a small scale tour to Wales)  and obtained their first victory when they defeated Aberystwyth University in the return match from that trip in October 2008.The club is now thriving within the University both socially and competitively, having won the league in the 2012/13 season and then reclaiming the title in 2014/15 season. Over the past 4 years the club has also produced a handful of players who have gone on to represent England students and a number of professional teams. They are always welcoming new players to the club to both introduce students to Rugby League and build on pre-existing rugby skills.\nEngland is a country that is part of the United Kingdom. It shares land borders with Wales to the west and Scotland to the north. The Irish Sea lies west of England and the Celtic Sea to the southwest. England is separated from continental Europe by the North Sea to the east and the English Channel to the south. The country covers five-eighths of the island of Great Britain, which lies in the North Atlantic, and includes over 100 smaller islands, such as the Isles of Scilly and the Isle of Wight.The area now called England was first inhabited by modern humans during the Upper Palaeolithic period, but takes its name from the Angles, a Germanic tribe deriving its name from the Anglia peninsula, who settled during the 5th and 6th centuries. England became a unified state in the 10th century, and since the Age of Discovery, which began during the 15th century, has had a significant cultural and legal impact on the wider world. The English language, the Anglican Church, and English law \u2013 the basis for the common law legal systems of many other countries around the world \u2013 developed in England, and the country's parliamentary system of government has been widely adopted by other nations. The Industrial Revolution began in 18th-century England, transforming its society into the world's first industrialised nation.England's terrain is chiefly low hills and plains, especially in central and southern England. However, there is upland and mountainous terrain in the north (for example, the Lake District and Pennines) and in the west (for example, Dartmoor and the Shropshire Hills). The capital is London, which has the largest metropolitan area in both the United Kingdom and the European Union. England's population of over 55 million comprises 84% of the population of the United Kingdom, largely concentrated around London, the South East, and conurbations in the Midlands, the North West, the North East, and Yorkshire, which each developed as major industrial regions during the 19th century.The Kingdom of England \u2013 which after 1535 included Wales \u2013 ceased being a separate sovereign state on 1 May 1707, when the Acts of Union put into effect the terms agreed in the Treaty of Union the previous year, resulting in a political union with the Kingdom of Scotland to create the Kingdom of Great Britain. In 1801, Great Britain was united with the Kingdom of Ireland (through another Act of Union) to become the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland. In 1922 the Irish Free State seceded from the United Kingdom, leading to the latter being renamed the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.\nThe United States of America (USA), commonly known as the United States (U.S. or US) or America, is a country comprising 50 states, a federal district, five major self-governing territories, and various possessions. At 3.8 million sq mi (9.8 million km2), the United States is the world's third or fourth largest country by total area and is slightly smaller than the entire continent of Europe's 3.93 million sq mi (10.2 million km2). With a population of more than 327 million people, the U.S. is the third most populous country. Most of the country is located contiguously in North America between Canada and Mexico. The extremely diverse geography, climate, and wildlife of the United States make it one of the world's 17 megadiverse countries.Paleo-Indians migrated from Siberia to the North American mainland at least 12,000 years ago. European colonization began in the 16th century. The United States emerged from the thirteen British colonies established along the East Coast. Following the French and Indian War, numerous disputes between Great Britain and the colonies led to the American Revolution, which began in 1775, and the subsequent Declaration of Independence in 1776. The war ended in 1783 with the United States becoming the first country to gain independence from a European power. The current constitution was adopted in 1788, with the first ten amendments, collectively named the Bill of Rights, being ratified in 1791 to guarantee many fundamental civil liberties. The United States embarked on a vigorous expansion across North America throughout the 19th century, acquiring new territories, displacing Native American tribes, and gradually admitting new states until it spanned the continent by 1848.During the second half of the 19th century, the Civil War led to the abolition of slavery. By the end of the century, the United States had extended into the Pacific Ocean, and its economy, driven in large part by the Industrial Revolution, began to soar. The Spanish\u2013American War and World War I confirmed the country's status as a global military power. The United States emerged from World War II as a global superpower and a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council. The end of the Cold War and the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 left the United States as the world's sole superpower.The United States is a federal republic and a representative democracy. It is a founding member of the United Nations, World Bank, International Monetary Fund, Organization of American States (OAS), and many other international organizations. The United States is a highly developed country, with the world's largest economy by nominal GDP and second-largest economy by PPP, accounting for approximately a quarter of global GDP. The U.S. economy is largely post-industrial, characterized by the dominance of services and knowledge-based activities, although the manufacturing sector remains the second-largest in the world. The United States is the world's largest importer and the second largest exporter of goods, by value. Although its population is only 4.3% of the world total, the U.S. holds 31% of the total wealth in the world, the largest share of global wealth concentrated in a single country.Despite income and wealth disparities, the United States continues to rank very high in measures of socioeconomic performance, including average wage, human development, per capita GDP, and worker productivity. The United States is the foremost military power in the world, making up a third of global military spending, and is a leading political, cultural, and scientific force internationally.\n", "path": ["kenmare municipal airport", "United States of America", "English", "England", "Europe"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the located in the administrative terroritorial entity of the capital of the country location of assiginack?", "correct_answer": "lasalle county", "model_answer": " [/INST] Assiginack is located in the Canadian province of Ontario on Manitoulin Island. Manitoulin Island is the largest freshwater island in the world, and it is located in the northeastern part of Lake Huron in Ontario,", "context": "Heraclides Ponticus (Greek: \u1f29\u03c1\u03b1\u03ba\u03bb\u03b5\u03af\u03b4\u03b7\u03c2 \u1f41 \u03a0\u03bf\u03bd\u03c4\u03b9\u03ba\u03cc\u03c2 Herakleides; c. 390 BC \u2013 c. 310 BC) was a Greek philosopher and astronomer who was born in Heraclea Pontica, now Karadeniz Ere\u011fli, Turkey, and migrated to Athens. He is best remembered for proposing that the Earth rotates on its axis, from west to east, once every 24 hours. He is also hailed as the originator of the heliocentric theory, although this is doubted by some.\nInternal bleeding (also called internal hemorrhage) is a loss of blood from a blood vessel that collects inside the body. Internal bleeding is usually not visible from the outside. It is a serious medical emergency but the extent of severity depends on bleeding rate and location of the bleeding (e.g. head, torso, extremities). Severe internal bleeding into the chest, abdomen, retroperitoneal space, pelvis, and thighs can cause hemorrhagic shock or death if proper medical treatment is not received quickly. Internal bleeding is a medical emergency and should be treated immediately by medical professionals.\nLaSalle County is located in the North Central region of the U.S. state of Illinois; it has an estimated population of 111,241 as of 2014 and its county seat and largest city is Ottawa.LaSalle County is part of the Ottawa, Illinois-Peru, IL Micropolitan Statistical Area, which is also included in the Chicago-Naperville, IL-IN-WI Combined Statistical Area.LaSalle County borders Woodford, Marshall, Putnam, Bureau, Livingston, Lee, DeKalb, Kendall, and Grundy counties.  Though LaSalle County is in the Chicago media market, it retains a unique identity with a mix of pleasant river towns, and vast expanses of farmland.  The county is at the intersection of the Chicago, Peoria, Quad Cities and Rockford television markets, with all four regions advertising (and businesses from the respective regions) and having a strong influence on the area such that despite the county's short distance from Chicago, approximately 60 miles (97 km). The county is part of the far southwestern reaches of the Chicago metropolitan area, and it is also part of the Fox Valley subregion and the larger Northern Illinois region.\nCanada (Canadian French: [kanad\u0251] listen ) is a country in the northern part of North America. Its ten provinces and three territories extend from the Atlantic to the Pacific and northward into the Arctic Ocean, covering 9.98 million square kilometres (3.85 million square miles), making it the world's second-largest country by total area. Its southern border with the United States, stretching some 8,891 kilometres (5,525 mi), is the world's longest bi-national land border. Canada's capital is Ottawa, and its three largest metropolitan areas are Toronto, Montreal, and Vancouver.As a whole, Canada is sparsely populated, the majority of its land area being dominated by forest and tundra. Its population is highly urbanized, with over 80 percent of its inhabitants concentrated in large and medium-sized cities, and 70 percent of citizens residing within 100 kilometres (62 mi) of the southern border. Canada's climate varies widely across its vast area, ranging from arctic weather in the north, to hot summers in the southern regions, with four distinct seasons.Various indigenous peoples have inhabited what is now Canada for thousands of years before European colonization. Beginning in the 16th century, British and French expeditions explored and later settled along the Atlantic coast. As a consequence of various armed conflicts, France ceded nearly all of its colonies in North America in 1763. In 1867, with the union of three British North American colonies through Confederation, Canada was formed as a federal dominion of four provinces. This began an accretion of provinces and territories and a process of increasing autonomy from the United Kingdom. This widening autonomy was highlighted by the Statute of Westminster of 1931 and culminated in the Canada Act of 1982, which severed the vestiges of legal dependence on the British parliament.Canada is a parliamentary democracy and a constitutional monarchy in the Westminster tradition, with Elizabeth II as its queen and a prime minister who serves as the chair of the Cabinet and head of government. The country is a realm within the Commonwealth of Nations, a member of the Francophonie and officially bilingual at the federal level. It ranks among the highest in international measurements of government transparency, civil liberties, quality of life, economic freedom, and education. It is one of the world's most ethnically diverse and multicultural nations, the product of large-scale immigration from many other countries. Canada's long and complex relationship with the United States has had a significant impact on its economy and culture.A developed country, Canada has the sixteenth-highest nominal per capita income globally as well as the twelfth-highest ranking in the Human Development Index. Its advanced economy is the tenth-largest in the world, relying chiefly upon its abundant natural resources and well-developed international trade networks. Canada is part of several major international and intergovernmental institutions or groupings including the United Nations, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, the G7 (formerly G8), the Group of Ten, the G20, the North American Free Trade Agreement and the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum.\nNeoconocephalus ensiger, known generally as the sword-bearing conehead or swordbearer, is a species of conehead in the family Tettigoniidae. It is found in North America.\nAssiginack () is a township in the Canadian province of Ontario, located on Manitoulin Island. An Ontario Historical Plaque was built on the grounds of the Assiginack Museum by the province to commemorate the Manitoulin Treaties' role in Ontario's heritage.\nBrontis Jodorowsky (born 27 October 1962) is a Mexican-French actor and  theatre director. He is the son of Chilean-French writer, director and actor Alejandro Jodorowsky and French actress Bernadette Landru.\nOttawa ( (listen), ; French pronunciation: \u200b[\u0254tawa]) is the capital city of Canada. It stands on the south bank of the Ottawa River in the eastern portion of southern Ontario. Ottawa borders Gatineau, Quebec; the two form the core of the Ottawa\u2013Gatineau census metropolitan area (CMA) and the National Capital Region (NCR). As of 2016, Ottawa had a city population of 934,243 and a metropolitan population of 1,323,783 making it the fourth-largest city and the fifth-largest CMA in Canada. In June 2019, the City of Ottawa estimated it had surpassed a population of 1 million.Founded in 1826 as Bytown, and incorporated as Ottawa in 1855, the city has evolved into the political centre of Canada. Its original boundaries were expanded through numerous annexations and were ultimately replaced by a new city incorporation and amalgamation in 2001 which significantly increased its land area. The city name \"Ottawa\" was chosen in reference to the Ottawa River, the name of which is derived from the Algonquin Odawa, meaning \"to trade\".Ottawa has the most educated population among Canadian cities and is home to a number of post-secondary, research, and cultural institutions, including the National Arts Centre, the National Gallery, and numerous national museums. Ottawa has the highest standard of living in the nation and low unemployment.\n", "path": ["assiginack", "Canada", "Ottawa", "lasalle county"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the indigenous to of the official language of the place of birth of the country location of kodumthara?", "correct_answer": "England", "model_answer": " [/INST] The indigenous language of the place of birth of the country where Kodumthara is located is Malayalam. Malayalam is the native language of the state of Kerala in southern India, where Kodumthara", "context": "English is a West Germanic language that was first spoken in early medieval England and eventually became a global lingua franca. It is named after the Angles, one of the Germanic tribes that migrated to the area of Great Britain that later took their name, as England. Both names derive from Anglia, a peninsula in the Baltic Sea. The language is closely related to Frisian and Low Saxon, and its vocabulary has been significantly influenced by other Germanic languages, particularly Norse (a North Germanic language), and to a greater extent by Latin and French.English has developed over the course of more than 1,400 years. The earliest forms of English, a group of West Germanic (Ingvaeonic) dialects brought to Great Britain by Anglo-Saxon settlers in the 5th century, are collectively called Old English. Middle English began in the late 11th century with the Norman conquest of England; this was a period in which the language was influenced by French. Early Modern English began in the late 15th century with the introduction of the printing press to London, the printing of the King James Bible and the start of the Great Vowel Shift.Through the worldwide influence of the British Empire, and later the United States, Modern English has been spreading around the world since the 17th century. Through all types of printed and electronic media, and spurred by the emergence of the United States as a global superpower, English has become the leading language of international discourse and the lingua franca in many regions and professional contexts such as science, navigation and law.English is the largest language by number of speakers, and the third most-spoken native language in the world, after Standard Chinese and Spanish. It is the most widely learned second language and is either the official language or one of the official languages in almost 60 sovereign states. There are more people who have learned it as a second language than there are native speakers. It is estimated that there are over 2 billion speakers of English. English is the most commonly spoken language in the United Kingdom, the United States, Canada, Australia, Ireland and New Zealand, and it is widely spoken in some areas of the Caribbean, Africa and South Asia. It is a co-official language of the United Nations, the European Union and many other world and regional international organisations. It is the most widely spoken Germanic language, accounting for at least 70% of speakers of this Indo-European branch. English has a vast vocabulary, though counting how many words any language has is impossible. English speakers are called \"Anglophones\".Modern English grammar is the result of a gradual change from a typical Indo-European dependent marking pattern, with a rich inflectional morphology and relatively free word order, to a mostly analytic pattern with little inflection, a fairly fixed SVO word order and a complex syntax. Modern English relies more on auxiliary verbs and word order for the expression of complex tenses, aspect and mood, as well as passive constructions, interrogatives and some negation. The variation among the accents and dialects of English used in different countries and regions\u2014in terms of phonetics and phonology, and sometimes also vocabulary, grammar, and spelling\u2014can often be understood by speakers of different dialects, but in extreme cases can lead to confusion or even mutual unintelligibility between English speakers.\nRosita Quinto Stecza (1925 \u2013 November 28, 2006), known by her screen name Rosa Mia, was an award-winning actress and one of the few female directors in the Philippines. She was known as the \"Queen of Tearjerker Movies\" for her work mostly on the drama genre typified in motherly roles.\nCystiscus matoensis is a species of very small sea snail, a marine gastropod mollusk or micromollusk in the family Cystiscidae.\nThe United States of America (USA), commonly known as the United States (U.S. or US) or America, is a country comprising 50 states, a federal district, five major self-governing territories, and various possessions. At 3.8 million sq mi (9.8 million km2), the United States is the world's third or fourth largest country by total area and is slightly smaller than the entire continent of Europe's 3.93 million sq mi (10.2 million km2). With a population of more than 327 million people, the U.S. is the third most populous country. Most of the country is located contiguously in North America between Canada and Mexico. The extremely diverse geography, climate, and wildlife of the United States make it one of the world's 17 megadiverse countries.Paleo-Indians migrated from Siberia to the North American mainland at least 12,000 years ago. European colonization began in the 16th century. The United States emerged from the thirteen British colonies established along the East Coast. Following the French and Indian War, numerous disputes between Great Britain and the colonies led to the American Revolution, which began in 1775, and the subsequent Declaration of Independence in 1776. The war ended in 1783 with the United States becoming the first country to gain independence from a European power. The current constitution was adopted in 1788, with the first ten amendments, collectively named the Bill of Rights, being ratified in 1791 to guarantee many fundamental civil liberties. The United States embarked on a vigorous expansion across North America throughout the 19th century, acquiring new territories, displacing Native American tribes, and gradually admitting new states until it spanned the continent by 1848.During the second half of the 19th century, the Civil War led to the abolition of slavery. By the end of the century, the United States had extended into the Pacific Ocean, and its economy, driven in large part by the Industrial Revolution, began to soar. The Spanish\u2013American War and World War I confirmed the country's status as a global military power. The United States emerged from World War II as a global superpower and a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council. The end of the Cold War and the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 left the United States as the world's sole superpower.The United States is a federal republic and a representative democracy. It is a founding member of the United Nations, World Bank, International Monetary Fund, Organization of American States (OAS), and many other international organizations. The United States is a highly developed country, with the world's largest economy by nominal GDP and second-largest economy by PPP, accounting for approximately a quarter of global GDP. The U.S. economy is largely post-industrial, characterized by the dominance of services and knowledge-based activities, although the manufacturing sector remains the second-largest in the world. The United States is the world's largest importer and the second largest exporter of goods, by value. Although its population is only 4.3% of the world total, the U.S. holds 31% of the total wealth in the world, the largest share of global wealth concentrated in a single country.Despite income and wealth disparities, the United States continues to rank very high in measures of socioeconomic performance, including average wage, human development, per capita GDP, and worker productivity. The United States is the foremost military power in the world, making up a third of global military spending, and is a leading political, cultural, and scientific force internationally.\nEngland is a country that is part of the United Kingdom. It shares land borders with Wales to the west and Scotland to the north. The Irish Sea lies west of England and the Celtic Sea to the southwest. England is separated from continental Europe by the North Sea to the east and the English Channel to the south. The country covers five-eighths of the island of Great Britain, which lies in the North Atlantic, and includes over 100 smaller islands, such as the Isles of Scilly and the Isle of Wight.The area now called England was first inhabited by modern humans during the Upper Palaeolithic period, but takes its name from the Angles, a Germanic tribe deriving its name from the Anglia peninsula, who settled during the 5th and 6th centuries. England became a unified state in the 10th century, and since the Age of Discovery, which began during the 15th century, has had a significant cultural and legal impact on the wider world. The English language, the Anglican Church, and English law \u2013 the basis for the common law legal systems of many other countries around the world \u2013 developed in England, and the country's parliamentary system of government has been widely adopted by other nations. The Industrial Revolution began in 18th-century England, transforming its society into the world's first industrialised nation.England's terrain is chiefly low hills and plains, especially in central and southern England. However, there is upland and mountainous terrain in the north (for example, the Lake District and Pennines) and in the west (for example, Dartmoor and the Shropshire Hills). The capital is London, which has the largest metropolitan area in both the United Kingdom and the European Union. England's population of over 55 million comprises 84% of the population of the United Kingdom, largely concentrated around London, the South East, and conurbations in the Midlands, the North West, the North East, and Yorkshire, which each developed as major industrial regions during the 19th century.The Kingdom of England \u2013 which after 1535 included Wales \u2013 ceased being a separate sovereign state on 1 May 1707, when the Acts of Union put into effect the terms agreed in the Treaty of Union the previous year, resulting in a political union with the Kingdom of Scotland to create the Kingdom of Great Britain. In 1801, Great Britain was united with the Kingdom of Ireland (through another Act of Union) to become the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland. In 1922 the Irish Free State seceded from the United Kingdom, leading to the latter being renamed the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.\nGaius Livius Salinator, son of Marcus, was a Roman consul of the gens Livia, said to have founded the city of Forum Livii (Forl\u00ec), in Italy, during his consulship in the year 188 BC. He also served as admiral when he was praetor in 191 BC in the war against Antiochus III the Great and defeated his admiral, Polyxenidas, in a naval engagement off Corycus.\n\"I Know (You Don't Love Me No More)\" is an R&B song written and performed by American singer Barbara George. It was released as her debut single in late 1961. This song became her signature song and her only major hit in United States, peaking at number 1 in the Billboard R&B singles chart and number 3 in the Pop Singles chart. The song was later covered by The Newbeats, Cher, Ike & Tina Turner, Bonnie Raitt, Anne Murray, Steve Marriott, Yvonne Fair, Felder's Orioles, and also a Spanish language version by Marisela was released in 1988. The Shirelles borrowed the melody of \"I Know\" for their 1963 cover of \"Everybody Loves A Lover\".\nKodumthara is a village just outside Pathanamthitta City Suburbs, located in Kerala state, India..Kodumthara is only 2 km away from PathanamthittaThe village is famous for the ancient Subrahmanya Temple.The temple is visited by devotees from various parts of Kerala.From Pathanamthitta, one can take a public bus to Thazhoorkadavu or Vallicode Kottayam to reach Kodumthara.Bus services are available frequently.\nIndia (born May 17, 1977) is the stage name of a pornographic actress, singer and rapper.She began working as an adult actress in around 1998 and has since appeared in over 200 videos. For five years she was an exclusive contract girl for the production company Video Team, and she has an exclusive sex toy line, manufactured by California Exotic Novelties.India owns the record company Black Widow Entertainment, and in 2006 she released her debut solo album Role Play. She had previously been a member of several girl groups; her first album, Hi Naturally, was released in 1994 when she was in the group Harmony Innocents. In July 2002 she was profiled on VH1's All Access hip-hop/porn special. In 2004 her vocals featured in the movie Walking Tall, starring Dwayne \"The Rock\" Johnson.\n", "path": ["kodumthara", "India", "United States of America", "English", "England"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the capital of the indigenous to of the official language of the country location of origin of a lawman is born?", "correct_answer": "London", "model_answer": " [/INST] The capital of the indigenous tribe and the official language of the country where the lawman is born is not specified in the context provided. The context primarily discusses various locations, historical events, and linguistic information related to England, the United States", "context": "Soma Electronic Music Studios is a recording studio owned and operated by John McEntire in Chicago, Illinois.Artists who have recorded there include:Bundy K. Brown, Brokeback, Broken Social Scene,  Chicago Underground, Bobby Conn, David Grubbs, Isotope 217, Rob Mazurek, Nobukazu Takemura, Jim O'Rourke, Pivot, Radian, Phil Ranelin, Red Krayola, The Research (band), Royal Trux, Neil Michael Hagerty, The Sea and Cake, Stereolab, Teenage Fanclub, Tortoise, Wilco, Will Oldham, Papa M, Vaudevileins, and The Car Is on Fire.\nUrban Male Magazine (a.k.a. UMM) is a Canadian men's interest magazine created and operated by Abbis Mahmoud, an Ontario entrepreneur that also operates several nightclubs like Lobby, Mansion, Tila Tequila, Buddha Bar, Tequila Jacks and the Brunswick House. The magazine was launched in 1998 and published its last issue in 2013.\nEnglish is a West Germanic language that was first spoken in early medieval England and eventually became a global lingua franca. It is named after the Angles, one of the Germanic tribes that migrated to the area of Great Britain that later took their name, as England. Both names derive from Anglia, a peninsula in the Baltic Sea. The language is closely related to Frisian and Low Saxon, and its vocabulary has been significantly influenced by other Germanic languages, particularly Norse (a North Germanic language), and to a greater extent by Latin and French.English has developed over the course of more than 1,400 years. The earliest forms of English, a group of West Germanic (Ingvaeonic) dialects brought to Great Britain by Anglo-Saxon settlers in the 5th century, are collectively called Old English. Middle English began in the late 11th century with the Norman conquest of England; this was a period in which the language was influenced by French. Early Modern English began in the late 15th century with the introduction of the printing press to London, the printing of the King James Bible and the start of the Great Vowel Shift.Through the worldwide influence of the British Empire, and later the United States, Modern English has been spreading around the world since the 17th century. Through all types of printed and electronic media, and spurred by the emergence of the United States as a global superpower, English has become the leading language of international discourse and the lingua franca in many regions and professional contexts such as science, navigation and law.English is the largest language by number of speakers, and the third most-spoken native language in the world, after Standard Chinese and Spanish. It is the most widely learned second language and is either the official language or one of the official languages in almost 60 sovereign states. There are more people who have learned it as a second language than there are native speakers. It is estimated that there are over 2 billion speakers of English. English is the most commonly spoken language in the United Kingdom, the United States, Canada, Australia, Ireland and New Zealand, and it is widely spoken in some areas of the Caribbean, Africa and South Asia. It is a co-official language of the United Nations, the European Union and many other world and regional international organisations. It is the most widely spoken Germanic language, accounting for at least 70% of speakers of this Indo-European branch. English has a vast vocabulary, though counting how many words any language has is impossible. English speakers are called \"Anglophones\".Modern English grammar is the result of a gradual change from a typical Indo-European dependent marking pattern, with a rich inflectional morphology and relatively free word order, to a mostly analytic pattern with little inflection, a fairly fixed SVO word order and a complex syntax. Modern English relies more on auxiliary verbs and word order for the expression of complex tenses, aspect and mood, as well as passive constructions, interrogatives and some negation. The variation among the accents and dialects of English used in different countries and regions\u2014in terms of phonetics and phonology, and sometimes also vocabulary, grammar, and spelling\u2014can often be understood by speakers of different dialects, but in extreme cases can lead to confusion or even mutual unintelligibility between English speakers.\nLondon is the capital of and largest city in England and the United Kingdom, with the largest municipal population in the European Union. Standing on the River Thames in the south-east of England, at the head of its 50-mile (80 km) estuary leading to the North Sea, London has been a major settlement for two millennia. Londinium was founded by the Romans. The City of London, London's ancient core \u2212 an area of just 1.12 square miles (2.9 km2) and colloquially known as the Square Mile \u2212 retains boundaries that follow closely its medieval limits. The City of Westminster is also an Inner London borough holding city status. Greater London is governed by the Mayor of London and the London Assembly.London is considered to be one of the world's most important global cities  and has been termed the world's most powerful,  most desirable, most influential, most visited, most expensive, innovative, sustainable, most investment friendly, most popular for work, and the most vegetarian-friendly city in the world. London exerts a considerable impact upon the arts, commerce, education, entertainment, fashion, finance, healthcare, media, professional services, research and development, tourism and transportation. London ranks 26 out of 300 major cities for economic performance. It is one of the largest financial centres and has either the fifth or sixth largest metropolitan area GDP. It is the most-visited city as measured by international arrivals and has the busiest city airport system as measured by passenger traffic. It is the leading investment destination, hosting more international retailers and ultra high-net-worth individuals than any other city. London's universities form the largest concentration of higher education institutes in Europe. In 2012, London became the first city to have hosted three modern Summer Olympic Games.London has a diverse range of people and cultures, and more than 300 languages are spoken in the region. Its estimated mid-2016 municipal population (corresponding to Greater London) was 8,787,892, the most populous of any city in the European Union and accounting for 13.4% of the UK population. London's urban area is the second most populous in the EU, after Paris, with 9,787,426 inhabitants at the 2011 census. The population within the London commuter belt is the most populous in the EU with 14,040,163 inhabitants in 2016. London was the world's most populous city from c. 1831 to 1925.London contains four World Heritage Sites: the Tower of London; Kew Gardens; the site comprising the Palace of Westminster, Westminster Abbey, and St Margaret's Church; and the historic settlement in Greenwich where the Royal Observatory, Greenwich defines the Prime Meridian, 0\u00b0 longitude, and Greenwich Mean Time. Other landmarks include Buckingham Palace, the London Eye, Piccadilly Circus, St Paul's Cathedral, Tower Bridge, Trafalgar Square and The Shard. London has numerous museums, galleries, libraries and sporting events. These include the British Museum, National Gallery, Natural History Museum, Tate Modern, British Library and West End theatres. The London Underground is the oldest underground railway network in the world.\nEngland is a country that is part of the United Kingdom. It shares land borders with Wales to the west and Scotland to the north. The Irish Sea lies west of England and the Celtic Sea to the southwest. England is separated from continental Europe by the North Sea to the east and the English Channel to the south. The country covers five-eighths of the island of Great Britain, which lies in the North Atlantic, and includes over 100 smaller islands, such as the Isles of Scilly and the Isle of Wight.The area now called England was first inhabited by modern humans during the Upper Palaeolithic period, but takes its name from the Angles, a Germanic tribe deriving its name from the Anglia peninsula, who settled during the 5th and 6th centuries. England became a unified state in the 10th century, and since the Age of Discovery, which began during the 15th century, has had a significant cultural and legal impact on the wider world. The English language, the Anglican Church, and English law \u2013 the basis for the common law legal systems of many other countries around the world \u2013 developed in England, and the country's parliamentary system of government has been widely adopted by other nations. The Industrial Revolution began in 18th-century England, transforming its society into the world's first industrialised nation.England's terrain is chiefly low hills and plains, especially in central and southern England. However, there is upland and mountainous terrain in the north (for example, the Lake District and Pennines) and in the west (for example, Dartmoor and the Shropshire Hills). The capital is London, which has the largest metropolitan area in both the United Kingdom and the European Union. England's population of over 55 million comprises 84% of the population of the United Kingdom, largely concentrated around London, the South East, and conurbations in the Midlands, the North West, the North East, and Yorkshire, which each developed as major industrial regions during the 19th century.The Kingdom of England \u2013 which after 1535 included Wales \u2013 ceased being a separate sovereign state on 1 May 1707, when the Acts of Union put into effect the terms agreed in the Treaty of Union the previous year, resulting in a political union with the Kingdom of Scotland to create the Kingdom of Great Britain. In 1801, Great Britain was united with the Kingdom of Ireland (through another Act of Union) to become the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland. In 1922 the Irish Free State seceded from the United Kingdom, leading to the latter being renamed the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.\nTapinoma wilsoni is a species of ant in the genus Tapinoma. Described by Sharaf and Aldawood in 2012, the species is endemic to Saudi Arabia.\nRasha Elsayed  (born (1981 -02-04)4 February 1981) is a retired Egyptian female volleyball player, who played as a libero. She was part of the Egypt women's national volleyball team at the 2002 FIVB Volleyball Women's World Championship in Germany. On club level she played with Zamalek SC.\nThe United States of America (USA), commonly known as the United States (U.S. or US) or America, is a country comprising 50 states, a federal district, five major self-governing territories, and various possessions. At 3.8 million sq mi (9.8 million km2), the United States is the world's third or fourth largest country by total area and is slightly smaller than the entire continent of Europe's 3.93 million sq mi (10.2 million km2). With a population of more than 327 million people, the U.S. is the third most populous country. Most of the country is located contiguously in North America between Canada and Mexico. The extremely diverse geography, climate, and wildlife of the United States make it one of the world's 17 megadiverse countries.Paleo-Indians migrated from Siberia to the North American mainland at least 12,000 years ago. European colonization began in the 16th century. The United States emerged from the thirteen British colonies established along the East Coast. Following the French and Indian War, numerous disputes between Great Britain and the colonies led to the American Revolution, which began in 1775, and the subsequent Declaration of Independence in 1776. The war ended in 1783 with the United States becoming the first country to gain independence from a European power. The current constitution was adopted in 1788, with the first ten amendments, collectively named the Bill of Rights, being ratified in 1791 to guarantee many fundamental civil liberties. The United States embarked on a vigorous expansion across North America throughout the 19th century, acquiring new territories, displacing Native American tribes, and gradually admitting new states until it spanned the continent by 1848.During the second half of the 19th century, the Civil War led to the abolition of slavery. By the end of the century, the United States had extended into the Pacific Ocean, and its economy, driven in large part by the Industrial Revolution, began to soar. The Spanish\u2013American War and World War I confirmed the country's status as a global military power. The United States emerged from World War II as a global superpower and a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council. The end of the Cold War and the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 left the United States as the world's sole superpower.The United States is a federal republic and a representative democracy. It is a founding member of the United Nations, World Bank, International Monetary Fund, Organization of American States (OAS), and many other international organizations. The United States is a highly developed country, with the world's largest economy by nominal GDP and second-largest economy by PPP, accounting for approximately a quarter of global GDP. The U.S. economy is largely post-industrial, characterized by the dominance of services and knowledge-based activities, although the manufacturing sector remains the second-largest in the world. The United States is the world's largest importer and the second largest exporter of goods, by value. Although its population is only 4.3% of the world total, the U.S. holds 31% of the total wealth in the world, the largest share of global wealth concentrated in a single country.Despite income and wealth disparities, the United States continues to rank very high in measures of socioeconomic performance, including average wage, human development, per capita GDP, and worker productivity. The United States is the foremost military power in the world, making up a third of global military spending, and is a leading political, cultural, and scientific force internationally.\nA Lawman Is Born is a 1937 American Western film directed by Sam Newfield.\n", "path": ["a lawman is born", "United States of America", "English", "England", "London"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the discoverer or inventor of the different from of the occupation of neophron of sicyon?", "correct_answer": "Gotthold Ephraim Lessing", "model_answer": " [/INST] Answering the query:\nNeophron of Sicyon was a playwright or dramatist. He is known for introducin g in his plays the torture of slaves, a practice not enacted on stage but referred to by", "context": "Neophron of Sicyon (\u039d\u03b5\u03cc\u03c6\u03c1\u03c9\u03bd, -\u03bf\u03bd\u03bf\u03c2) was one of the most prolific of the ancient Greek dramatists, to whom are accredited one hundred and twenty pieces, of which only a few fragments of his Medea remain. This, it is said, Euripides used in his tragedy which bears the same title, although modern scholarship is divided on which tragedy came first. Neophron likely lived in the second half of the fifth century B.C. and was a rough contemporary of Euripides.As Suidas tells us, he introduced in his plays the torture of slaves, such scenes, according to the canons of dramatic art, not being enacted on the stage, but merely referred to by messengers. Alexander the Great had Neophron executed along with the philosopher Callisthenes.\nDivers Alert Network (DAN) is a group of not-for-profit organizations dedicated to improving diving safety for all divers. It was founded in Durham, North Carolina, United States, in 1980 at Duke University providing 24/7 telephonic hot-line diving medical assistance. Since then the organization has expanded globally and now has independent regional organizations in North America, Europe, Japan, Asia-Pacific and Southern Africa.The DAN group of organizations provide similar services, some only to members, and others to any person on request. Member services usually include a diving accident hot-line, and diving accident and travel insurance. Services to the general public usually include diving medical advice and training in first aid for diving accidents. DAN America and DAN Europe maintain databases on diving accidents, treatment and fatalities, and crowd-sourced databases on dive profiles uploaded by volunteers which are used for ongoing research programmes. They publish research results and collaborate with other organizations on projects of common interest.\nA playwright or dramatist (rarely dramaturge) is a person who writes plays. One such person is William Shakespeare, who lived during both the Tudor and Stuart eras of British history.\nGotthold Ephraim Lessing (; German: [\u02c8l\u025bs\u026a\u014b]; 22 January 1729 \u2013 15 February 1781) was a German writer, philosopher, dramatist, publicist and art critic, and an outstanding representative of the Enlightenment era. His plays and theoretical writings substantially influenced the development of German literature. He is widely considered by theatre historians to be the first dramaturg in his role at Abel Seyler's Hamburg National Theatre.\nKill Me Again is a 1989 American neo-noir thriller film directed by John Dahl, and starring Val Kilmer, Joanne Whalley and Michael Madsen.\nKeowee (Cherokee: \u13a8\u13a3\u13eb) was a Cherokee town in the north of present-day South Carolina. Located along the Lower Cherokee Traders Path, part of the Upper Road through the Piedmont, it was settled in what is present-day Oconee County, the westernmost county of South Carolina, at the foot of the Blue Ridge Mountains, just north of Clemson. Located on the banks of the Keowee River, Keowee was submerged beneath the waters of Lake Keowee when the river was dammed in a mid-20th century power project.In the early half of the 18th century, approximately 2100 Cherokee inhabited sixteen towns east of the Blue Ridge Mountains. The Cherokee people were geographically divided into three regions: the Overhill Towns, the Middle Towns, and the Lower Towns. For the Cherokee, towns were the most important units of government. There were seven Cherokee villages, of which Keowee was one, and the rulers or chiefs of each had a substantial amount of authority.  Keowee was principal among the Cherokee \"Lower Towns\". Keowee Town is translated into \"place of mulberries.\" It was also known as \"Old Keowee\" to distinguish it from other towns of the same name.Keowee was the birthplace (around 1770) of the father of John Norton. Norton, who became a chief of the Mohawk, was of half Cherokee and half Scots ancestry. His writings provide a rare American Indian perspective of the early 19th century in the United States. Norton spells the town name as Kuwoki.When naturalist William Bartram visited the town site in May 1776, he noted no Cherokee lived there. Before then, the British colonists razed the town in the Anglo-Cherokee War.\nCorticeira Amorim S.G.P.S., S.A., is a Portuguese subholding company belonging to the Amorim Group and claims to have been the world leader in the cork industry for over 130 years, with operations in hundreds of countries all over the world. Corticeira Amorim is responsible for the management of 70 companies engaged in the cork manufacture, research, development, promotion and sale of products and new solutions for the cork industry. Ant\u00f3nio Rios de Amorim is the company\u2019s Chairman and CEO. Organized in five Business Units \u2013 Raw-Materials, Cork Stoppers, Floor & Wall Coverings, Composite Cork and Insulation Cork \u2013 Corticeira Amorim sells an array of products largely to such industries as the aeronautical, construction and wine-producing industries; a result of the investment made in R&D. Amorim's holding company is listed on the Euronext Lisbon stock exchange.\nA dramaturge or dramaturg is a literary adviser or editor in a theatre, opera, or film company who researches, selects, adapts, edits, and interprets scripts, libretti, texts, and printed programmes (or helps others with these tasks), consults with authors, and does public relations work. Its modern-day function was originated by the innovations of Gotthold Ephraim Lessing, an 18th-century German playwright, philosopher, and theatre theorist.\n", "path": ["neophron of sicyon", "playwright", "dramaturge", "Gotthold Ephraim Lessing"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the legislative body of the country location of origin of the continent of the country location of onkraj meze?", "correct_answer": "the riksdag", "model_answer": " [/INST] The legislative body of the country located in the continent of Europe, specifically in the country Slovenia, where Onkraj Me\u017ee is a dispersed settlement, is the Riksdag. The Riksdag is the national legisl", "context": "Slovenia ( (listen) sloh-VEE-nee-\u0259; Slovene: Slovenija [sl\u0254\u02c8\u028b\u00e8\u02d0nija]), officially the Republic of Slovenia (Slovene: Republika Slovenija , abbr.: RS), is a country located in southern Central Europe at a crossroads of important European cultural and trade routes. It is bordered by Italy to the west, Austria to the north, Hungary to the northeast, Croatia to the southeast, and the Adriatic Sea to the southwest. It covers 20,273 square kilometers (7,827 sq mi) and has a population of 2.07 million. One of the successor states of the former Yugoslavia, Slovenia is a parliamentary republic and a member of the United Nations, of the European Union, and of NATO. The capital and largest city is Ljubljana.Slovenia has a mostly mountainous terrain with a mainly continental climate, with the exception of the Slovene Littoral, which has a sub-Mediterranean climate, and of the northwest, which has an Alpine climate. Additionally, the Dinaric Alps and the Pannonian Plain meet on the territory of Slovenia. The country, marked by a significant biological diversity, is one of the most water-rich in Europe, with a dense river network, a rich aquifer system, and significant karst underground watercourses. Over half of the territory is covered by forest. The human settlement of Slovenia is dispersed and uneven.Slovenia has historically been the crossroads of Slavic, Germanic, and Romance languages and cultures. Although the population is not homogeneous, Slovenes comprise the majority. The South Slavic language Slovene is the official language throughout the country. Slovenia is a largely secularized country, but Catholicism and Lutheranism have significantly influenced its culture and identity. The economy of Slovenia is small, open and export-oriented and is thus strongly influenced by the conditions of its exporting partners economies. It has been severely hurt by the Eurozone crisis which started in 2009. The main economic field is services, followed by industry and construction.Historically, the current territory of Slovenia has formed part of many different states, including the Roman Empire, Byzantine Empire, Carolingian Empire, and the Holy Roman Empire, the Habsburg Monarchy, the Republic of Venice, the French-administered  Illyrian Provinces of Napoleon I, the Austrian Empire and Austria-Hungary. In October 1918 the Slovenes exercised self-determination for the first time by co-founding the State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs. In December 1918 they merged with the Kingdom of Serbia into the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes (renamed Kingdom of Yugoslavia in 1929).During World War II (1939\u20131945) Germany, Italy, and Hungary occupied and annexed Slovenia (1941\u20131945), with a tiny area transferred to the Independent State of Croatia, a Nazi puppet state. In 1945 Slovenia became a founding member of the Federal People's Republic of Yugoslavia, renamed in 1963 as the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. In the first years after World War II this state was initially allied with the Eastern Bloc, but it never subscribed to the Warsaw Pact and in 1961 became one of the founders of the Non-Aligned Movement.In June 1991, after the introduction of multi-party representative democracy, Slovenia became the first republic that split from Yugoslavia and became an independent sovereign state. In 2004, it entered NATO and the European Union; in 2007 became the first formerly communist country to join the Eurozone; and in 2010 it joined the OECD, a global association of high-income developed countries. Slovenia is a high-income advanced economy with a very high Human Development Index.\nBiloclymenia is a genus in the ammonoid order Clymeniida which is characterized by a dorsal retrosiphonitic siphuncle with long adapically pointing septal necks.The shell of shell Biloclymenia is thickly discoidal, more or less involute, with a moderately wide umbilicus, lightly thickened sides and rounded venter. The shell is surface smooth, covered merely by growth lines which form two salients. The ventral lobe of the suture is wide and divided in two with a secondary lobe at the top of median saddle. Additional sutural elements are two umbilical, an inner lateral and a dorsal lobe.The Treatise on Invertebrate Paleontology (Part L 1957) includes Biloclymenia in the Wocklumariidae which is derived from Hexaclymeniidae. Saunders et al(1999) expands upon this theme and puts Bilocymenia and Biloclymeniidae in the Sellaclymeniaceae (suborder Gonioclymeniina), indicates the following phylogenetic progression beginning with Hexaclymenia.Hexaclymenia (Hexaclymeniidae) --> Uraloclymenia (Miroclymeniidae) --> Kiaclymenia (Biloclymeniidae) --> Bioloclymenia.\nSakouna  is a village in the commune of Bassila in the Donga Department of western Benin.\nSweden (Swedish: Sverige [\u02c8sv\u00e6rj\u025b] (listen)), formal name: the Kingdom of Sweden (Swedish: Konungariket Sverige ), is a Scandinavian Nordic country in Northern Europe. It borders Norway to the west and north and Finland to the east, and is connected to Denmark in the southwest by a bridge-tunnel across the \u00d6resund, a strait at the Swedish-Danish border. At 450,295 square kilometres (173,860 sq mi), Sweden is the largest country in Northern Europe, the third-largest country in the European Union and the fifth largest country in Europe by area. Sweden has a total population of 10.3 million of which 2.5 million have a foreign background. It has a low population density of 22 inhabitants per square kilometre (57/sq mi). The highest concentration is in the central and southern half of the country.Sweden is part of the geographical area of Fennoscandia. The climate is in general very mild for its northerly latitude due to significant maritime influence. In spite of the high latitude, Sweden often has warm continental summers, being located in between the North Atlantic, the Baltic Sea and the vast Eurasian Russian landmass. The general climate and environment varies significantly from the south and north due to the vast latitudal difference and much of Sweden has reliably cold and snowy winters. It also has a vast coastline with many offshore islands, many lakes, a large proportion of the country covered by forests and includes a portion of the Scandinavian Mountains.Germanic peoples have inhabited Sweden since prehistoric times, emerging into history as the Geats (Swedish G\u00f6tar) and Swedes (Svear) and constituting the sea peoples known as the Norsemen. Southern Sweden is predominantly agricultural, while the north is heavily forested.  Today,  the sovereign state of Sweden is a constitutional monarchy and parliamentary democracy, with a monarch as head of state, like its neighbour Norway. The capital city is Stockholm, which is also the most populous city in the country. Legislative power is vested in the 349-member unicameral Riksdag. Executive power is exercised by the government chaired by the prime minister. Sweden is a unitary state, currently divided into 21 counties and 290 municipalities.An independent Swedish state emerged during the early 12th century. After the Black Death in the middle of the 14th century killed about a third of the Scandinavian population, the Hanseatic League threatened Scandinavia's culture, finances and languages. This led to the forming of the Scandinavian Kalmar Union in 1397, which Sweden left in 1523. When Sweden became involved in the Thirty Years War on the Reformist side, an expansion of its territories began and eventually the Swedish Empire was formed. This became one of the great powers of Europe until the early 18th century. Swedish territories outside the Scandinavian Peninsula were gradually lost during the 18th and 19th centuries, ending with the annexation of present-day Finland by Russia in 1809. The last war in which Sweden was directly involved was in 1814, when Norway was militarily forced into personal union. Since then, Sweden has been at peace, maintaining an official policy of neutrality in foreign affairs. The union with Norway was peacefully dissolved in 1905. Sweden was formally neutral through both world wars and the Cold War, albeit Sweden has since 2009 openly moved towards cooperation with NATO. Sweden has close relations to its Nordic neighbours, including linguistically, with the Swedish language being an official language in Finland and Swedish also being mutually intelligible with Danish and Norwegian.After the end of the Cold War, Sweden joined the European Union (EU) on 1 January 1995, but declined NATO membership, as well as Eurozone (EZ) membership following a referendum. It is also a member of the United Nations, the Nordic Council, the Council of Europe, the World Trade Organization and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). Sweden maintains a Nordic social welfare system that provides universal health care and tertiary education for its citizens. It has the world's eleventh-highest per capita income and ranks highly in numerous metrics of national performance, including quality of life, health, education, protection of civil liberties, economic competitiveness, equality, prosperity and human development.\nThe Riksdag (Swedish: riksdagen or Sveriges riksdag) is the national legislature and the supreme decision-making body of Sweden. Since 1971, the Riksdag has been a unicameral legislature with 349 members (riksdagsledam\u00f6ter), elected proportionally and serving, from 1994 onwards, on fixed four-year terms.The constitutional functions of the Riksdag are enumerated in the Instrument of Government (Regeringsformen), and its internal workings are specified in greater detail in the Riksdag Act (Riksdagsordningen).The seat of the Riksdag is at Parliament House (Swedish: Riksdagshuset), on the island of Helgeandsholmen in the central parts of Stockholm. The Riksdag has its institutional roots in the feudal Riksdag of the Estates, by tradition thought to have first assembled in Arboga in 1435, and in 1866 following reforms of the 1809 Instrument of Government that body was transformed into a bicameral legislature with an upper chamber (F\u00f6rsta Kammaren) and a lower chamber (Andra Kammaren).The most recent general election was held on 9 September 2018.\nEurope is a Swedish rock band formed in Upplands V\u00e4sby in 1979,  by vocalist Joey Tempest, guitarist John Norum, bassist Peter Olsson, and drummer Tony Reno. They got a major breakthrough in Sweden in 1982 by winning the televised competition \"Rock-SM\" (Swedish Rock Championships): it was the first time this competition was held, and Europe became a larger success than the competition itself.Since their formation, Europe has released eleven studio albums, three live albums, three compilations and twenty-four music videos.Europe rose to international fame in the 1980s with their third album, 1986's The Final Countdown, which has sold over 3 million copies in the United States and 15 million copies worldwide (including album and single). Europe have sold over 25 million records worldwide.  The band has had two top 20 albums on the Billboard 200 chart (The Final Countdown  and Out of This World) and three top 30 singles on the Billboard Hot 100 chart (\"The Final Countdown\", \"Rock the Night\" and \"Carrie\").Europe went on hiatus in 1992, reunited temporarily for a one-off performance in Stockholm on New Year's Eve 1999 and announced an official reunion in 2003. Since then the band has released six albums, Start from the Dark (2004), Secret Society (2006), Last Look at Eden (2009), Bag of Bones (2012), War of Kings (2015) and Walk the Earth (2017).Europe has achieved new attention in the US due to being featured in a GEICO Insurance cable television commercial campaign viewed for many months across the US in 2015\u201316.The band is mainly influenced by Whitesnake, Deep Purple, Rainbow, Led Zeppelin, Thin Lizzy, UFO and Michael Schenker Group.\nJos\u00e9 Mar\u00eda Cases Hern\u00e1ndez (born 23 November 1986) is a Spanish professional footballer who plays for Greek club Doxa Drama F.C. as a midfielder.\nElizabeth Philp (1827 \u2013 26 November 1885) was an English singer, music educator and composer.Philp was born in Falmouth, Cornwall, the eldest daughter of geographer James Philp. She was a protegee of Charlotte Cushman, and studied harmony with German composer Ferdinand Hiller at Cologne. She published a collection How to Sing an English Ballad including sixty songs. In London she was a neighbor and friend of Catherine Hogarth, and part of a community of musicians and writers there.Philp died in London in 1885, aged 58 years, from liver disease.\nOnkraj Me\u017ee (pronounced [\u02c8o\u02d0\u014bk\u027eai\u032f \u02c8me\u02d0\u0292\u025b]) is a dispersed settlement in the hills above the right bank of the Me\u017ea River in the Municipality of Me\u017eica in the Carinthia region in northern Slovenia.\n", "path": ["onkraj meze", "Slovenia", "Europe", "Sweden", "the riksdag"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the capital of the indigenous to of the official language of the country location of santa barbara high school?", "correct_answer": "London", "model_answer": " [/INST] The capital of the country where Santa Barbara High School is located is Santa Barbara, California, in the United States of America. Santa Barbara is not the capital city of any country on its own. However, it is located in the state of California,", "context": "English is a West Germanic language that was first spoken in early medieval England and eventually became a global lingua franca. It is named after the Angles, one of the Germanic tribes that migrated to the area of Great Britain that later took their name, as England. Both names derive from Anglia, a peninsula in the Baltic Sea. The language is closely related to Frisian and Low Saxon, and its vocabulary has been significantly influenced by other Germanic languages, particularly Norse (a North Germanic language), and to a greater extent by Latin and French.English has developed over the course of more than 1,400 years. The earliest forms of English, a group of West Germanic (Ingvaeonic) dialects brought to Great Britain by Anglo-Saxon settlers in the 5th century, are collectively called Old English. Middle English began in the late 11th century with the Norman conquest of England; this was a period in which the language was influenced by French. Early Modern English began in the late 15th century with the introduction of the printing press to London, the printing of the King James Bible and the start of the Great Vowel Shift.Through the worldwide influence of the British Empire, and later the United States, Modern English has been spreading around the world since the 17th century. Through all types of printed and electronic media, and spurred by the emergence of the United States as a global superpower, English has become the leading language of international discourse and the lingua franca in many regions and professional contexts such as science, navigation and law.English is the largest language by number of speakers, and the third most-spoken native language in the world, after Standard Chinese and Spanish. It is the most widely learned second language and is either the official language or one of the official languages in almost 60 sovereign states. There are more people who have learned it as a second language than there are native speakers. It is estimated that there are over 2 billion speakers of English. English is the most commonly spoken language in the United Kingdom, the United States, Canada, Australia, Ireland and New Zealand, and it is widely spoken in some areas of the Caribbean, Africa and South Asia. It is a co-official language of the United Nations, the European Union and many other world and regional international organisations. It is the most widely spoken Germanic language, accounting for at least 70% of speakers of this Indo-European branch. English has a vast vocabulary, though counting how many words any language has is impossible. English speakers are called \"Anglophones\".Modern English grammar is the result of a gradual change from a typical Indo-European dependent marking pattern, with a rich inflectional morphology and relatively free word order, to a mostly analytic pattern with little inflection, a fairly fixed SVO word order and a complex syntax. Modern English relies more on auxiliary verbs and word order for the expression of complex tenses, aspect and mood, as well as passive constructions, interrogatives and some negation. The variation among the accents and dialects of English used in different countries and regions\u2014in terms of phonetics and phonology, and sometimes also vocabulary, grammar, and spelling\u2014can often be understood by speakers of different dialects, but in extreme cases can lead to confusion or even mutual unintelligibility between English speakers.\nLondon is the capital of and largest city in England and the United Kingdom, with the largest municipal population in the European Union. Standing on the River Thames in the south-east of England, at the head of its 50-mile (80 km) estuary leading to the North Sea, London has been a major settlement for two millennia. Londinium was founded by the Romans. The City of London, London's ancient core \u2212 an area of just 1.12 square miles (2.9 km2) and colloquially known as the Square Mile \u2212 retains boundaries that follow closely its medieval limits. The City of Westminster is also an Inner London borough holding city status. Greater London is governed by the Mayor of London and the London Assembly.London is considered to be one of the world's most important global cities  and has been termed the world's most powerful,  most desirable, most influential, most visited, most expensive, innovative, sustainable, most investment friendly, most popular for work, and the most vegetarian-friendly city in the world. London exerts a considerable impact upon the arts, commerce, education, entertainment, fashion, finance, healthcare, media, professional services, research and development, tourism and transportation. London ranks 26 out of 300 major cities for economic performance. It is one of the largest financial centres and has either the fifth or sixth largest metropolitan area GDP. It is the most-visited city as measured by international arrivals and has the busiest city airport system as measured by passenger traffic. It is the leading investment destination, hosting more international retailers and ultra high-net-worth individuals than any other city. London's universities form the largest concentration of higher education institutes in Europe. In 2012, London became the first city to have hosted three modern Summer Olympic Games.London has a diverse range of people and cultures, and more than 300 languages are spoken in the region. Its estimated mid-2016 municipal population (corresponding to Greater London) was 8,787,892, the most populous of any city in the European Union and accounting for 13.4% of the UK population. London's urban area is the second most populous in the EU, after Paris, with 9,787,426 inhabitants at the 2011 census. The population within the London commuter belt is the most populous in the EU with 14,040,163 inhabitants in 2016. London was the world's most populous city from c. 1831 to 1925.London contains four World Heritage Sites: the Tower of London; Kew Gardens; the site comprising the Palace of Westminster, Westminster Abbey, and St Margaret's Church; and the historic settlement in Greenwich where the Royal Observatory, Greenwich defines the Prime Meridian, 0\u00b0 longitude, and Greenwich Mean Time. Other landmarks include Buckingham Palace, the London Eye, Piccadilly Circus, St Paul's Cathedral, Tower Bridge, Trafalgar Square and The Shard. London has numerous museums, galleries, libraries and sporting events. These include the British Museum, National Gallery, Natural History Museum, Tate Modern, British Library and West End theatres. The London Underground is the oldest underground railway network in the world.\nEngland is a country that is part of the United Kingdom. It shares land borders with Wales to the west and Scotland to the north. The Irish Sea lies west of England and the Celtic Sea to the southwest. England is separated from continental Europe by the North Sea to the east and the English Channel to the south. The country covers five-eighths of the island of Great Britain, which lies in the North Atlantic, and includes over 100 smaller islands, such as the Isles of Scilly and the Isle of Wight.The area now called England was first inhabited by modern humans during the Upper Palaeolithic period, but takes its name from the Angles, a Germanic tribe deriving its name from the Anglia peninsula, who settled during the 5th and 6th centuries. England became a unified state in the 10th century, and since the Age of Discovery, which began during the 15th century, has had a significant cultural and legal impact on the wider world. The English language, the Anglican Church, and English law \u2013 the basis for the common law legal systems of many other countries around the world \u2013 developed in England, and the country's parliamentary system of government has been widely adopted by other nations. The Industrial Revolution began in 18th-century England, transforming its society into the world's first industrialised nation.England's terrain is chiefly low hills and plains, especially in central and southern England. However, there is upland and mountainous terrain in the north (for example, the Lake District and Pennines) and in the west (for example, Dartmoor and the Shropshire Hills). The capital is London, which has the largest metropolitan area in both the United Kingdom and the European Union. England's population of over 55 million comprises 84% of the population of the United Kingdom, largely concentrated around London, the South East, and conurbations in the Midlands, the North West, the North East, and Yorkshire, which each developed as major industrial regions during the 19th century.The Kingdom of England \u2013 which after 1535 included Wales \u2013 ceased being a separate sovereign state on 1 May 1707, when the Acts of Union put into effect the terms agreed in the Treaty of Union the previous year, resulting in a political union with the Kingdom of Scotland to create the Kingdom of Great Britain. In 1801, Great Britain was united with the Kingdom of Ireland (through another Act of Union) to become the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland. In 1922 the Irish Free State seceded from the United Kingdom, leading to the latter being renamed the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.\nSanta Barbara Senior High School, \"Home of the Dons,\" is situated on a 40-acre (160,000 m2) campus in Santa Barbara, California and is part of the Santa Barbara Unified School District.  One of the oldest high schools in California, it was established in 1875, and moved to its current site in 1924.  Until the creation of two rival high schools in 1959 and 1966, it was the sole public high school serving the city of Santa Barbara.  In November 2005, its 18th-century Spanish influenced design was named an official California and City historic landmark.  Today, Santa Barbara High School has an enrollment of roughly 2,200 pupils and certified staff numbering 108.The school's newspaper, The Forge, has been in continuous publication since 1914, making it the second oldest high school newspaper in California.From 2006 to 2008 SBHS has advanced in Newsweek's national survey of the top 1,300 public high schools. In 2008, it ranked 800, putting it in the top 5% of schools in the United States. In 2008 SBHS ranked high above the state average in SAT scores. On a scale out of 2400, over 75 percent of SBHS students tested \u2265 1500, compared to the state average of less than 50 percent. The class of 2011 displayed their knowledge in 2009 when more the 85% of them passed the California High School Exit exam (CAHSEE).Santa Barbara High School is widely known nationally for its achievements in athletics. While many schools celebrate league championships, Santa Barbara High School only recognizes CIF and California State Championships. The Dons went to five CIF finals in the 2007\u20132008 year alone. Santa Barbara has a rich history of CIF championships as well. The school has 51 titles to their name as well as many runners-up.  In 2014 the girls' basketball team, coached by Andrew Butcher, won the CIF 3A Southern Section and was the state champion runner-up.SBHS embraces and is known for its diversity, where Latino students consist of approximately 55 percent of the student population. Students looking for a creative outlet can choose from three academies\u2014Visual Arts and Design (known as VADA), Computer Science (CSA), and Multimedia Arts and Design, or MAD. SBHS also promotes student expression through its award-winning Performing Arts department, consisting of theatre/musical theatre under the direction of Otto Layman; vocal music under the direction of Mary La Face; and the award-winning marching band, the Marching Dons, and other instrumental musical groups under the direction of Dylan Aguilera. The theatre at Santa Barbara has a long and storied history, having been performed continuously for over 100 years.  Its current venue, in the heart of the campus, is an 800-seat state of the art complex first built in 1924 and restored in 1970 and again beginning in 1996 to the present (new seating, sound and lighting was installed beginning in 2007). Two major shows are produced each year, with professional designers, musical director and choreographer on staff. Former student participants in the performing arts program include Dana Costello (Jekyll and Hyde on Broadway) and Jessica Adcock Love (Grace on Broadway).  SBHS has had two finalists in the Youth Spotlight Awards (Geoffrey Hahn, runner-up, 2012 and Grant Bower, 2014). The students at SBHS also produce, direct, and act in their own musical revue, Music of the Night, early each February.\nThe United States of America (USA), commonly known as the United States (U.S. or US) or America, is a country comprising 50 states, a federal district, five major self-governing territories, and various possessions. At 3.8 million sq mi (9.8 million km2), the United States is the world's third or fourth largest country by total area and is slightly smaller than the entire continent of Europe's 3.93 million sq mi (10.2 million km2). With a population of more than 327 million people, the U.S. is the third most populous country. Most of the country is located contiguously in North America between Canada and Mexico. The extremely diverse geography, climate, and wildlife of the United States make it one of the world's 17 megadiverse countries.Paleo-Indians migrated from Siberia to the North American mainland at least 12,000 years ago. European colonization began in the 16th century. The United States emerged from the thirteen British colonies established along the East Coast. Following the French and Indian War, numerous disputes between Great Britain and the colonies led to the American Revolution, which began in 1775, and the subsequent Declaration of Independence in 1776. The war ended in 1783 with the United States becoming the first country to gain independence from a European power. The current constitution was adopted in 1788, with the first ten amendments, collectively named the Bill of Rights, being ratified in 1791 to guarantee many fundamental civil liberties. The United States embarked on a vigorous expansion across North America throughout the 19th century, acquiring new territories, displacing Native American tribes, and gradually admitting new states until it spanned the continent by 1848.During the second half of the 19th century, the Civil War led to the abolition of slavery. By the end of the century, the United States had extended into the Pacific Ocean, and its economy, driven in large part by the Industrial Revolution, began to soar. The Spanish\u2013American War and World War I confirmed the country's status as a global military power. The United States emerged from World War II as a global superpower and a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council. The end of the Cold War and the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 left the United States as the world's sole superpower.The United States is a federal republic and a representative democracy. It is a founding member of the United Nations, World Bank, International Monetary Fund, Organization of American States (OAS), and many other international organizations. The United States is a highly developed country, with the world's largest economy by nominal GDP and second-largest economy by PPP, accounting for approximately a quarter of global GDP. The U.S. economy is largely post-industrial, characterized by the dominance of services and knowledge-based activities, although the manufacturing sector remains the second-largest in the world. The United States is the world's largest importer and the second largest exporter of goods, by value. Although its population is only 4.3% of the world total, the U.S. holds 31% of the total wealth in the world, the largest share of global wealth concentrated in a single country.Despite income and wealth disparities, the United States continues to rank very high in measures of socioeconomic performance, including average wage, human development, per capita GDP, and worker productivity. The United States is the foremost military power in the world, making up a third of global military spending, and is a leading political, cultural, and scientific force internationally.\nWillie Hordge (born February 9, 1984) is an American sprinter who specialized in the 100 meters.At the 2001 World Youth Championships in Debrecen, Hungary, Hordge won a silver medal in 100 meters, finishing behind only Darrel Brown (10.31 to 10.41). In his junior season at Forest Brook High School in Houston, Texas, Hordge narrowly missed winning the Texas 4A 100-meter title to Brendan Christian 10.15 to 10.16. The following month, he won the 100 meters over Kelly Willie and Jonathan Wade in the Great Southwest Classic in Albuquerque, New Mexico, with a 10.21 clocking (+2.0 m/s wind).  Horde still holds the 17-18 USATF Gulf Association record the 100 meters at 10.11 from that era.Hordge participated in the 2002 World Junior Championships in Kingston, Jamaica, and finished with a bronze medal in 100 meters, placing third behind Darrel Brown and Marc Burns. Known for his slow start out of the blocks, officials at the meet were in amazement at how he closed at the finish. A few days later at the same meet, he anchored the United States 4x100 relay squad to Gold. Hordge received the baton identical to Usain Bolt of Jamaica, and then pulled away from him down the stretch, as he and teammates Ashton Collins, Wes Felix, and Ivory Williams set a new world junior record of 38.92.  It was the fourth and fastest of five different 4x100 relays he anchored under 40 seconds in the space of three weeks.  Just like he is today, Usain Bolt was the talk of the meet back then, and Hordge showed him up on his own soil in Kingston. Bolt was visibly upset after the finish. The day before Bolt had just won the 200 meters.Hordge was the cover boy of the September 2002 edition of track & Field News.  He was the 2002 \"Nike Athlete of the Year.\"At the 2003 Pan Am Junior Championships in Bridgetown, Barbados, the pair faced off again on anchor leg of the 4x100 meter relay. Hordge shocked Bolt again, and the United States won the gold in 39.29 to Jamaica's 39.40.  This was just one day after Bolt had set the World Youth Best and equalled the World Junior Record in the 200 meters.As a 181 pounds (82 kg) football player with reputed 4.1 (actual 4.3) speed he was invited to play in the 2003 Oil Bowl.  He was recruited to several high profile schools, including the University of Arkansas, Texas A&M and Mississippi State University.  He committed to Arkansas.Hordge's entry was dependent on achieving NCAA eligibility.  He struggled with the ACT test following football games, but was reported to have passed on his fourth attempt.  Arkansas fell through, Hordge ended up going to Butler Community College along with Ivory Williams.  He won the 2004 Kansas Relays while representing Butler.  He held the 200 meters meet record at the Masked Rider Open for ten years.  He ended up at SUNY, Buffalo, winning the 2007 NCAA D3 National Championship at both 100 meters and 200 meters his junior year, but at a reported 212 pounds (96 kg), he was no longer running world class times.  He was \"New York State Track Athlete of the Year\" that year.\nS\u00e3o Pedro da \u00c1gua Branca is the westernmost municipality in the Brazilian state of Maranh\u00e3o, bordering both Par\u00e1 and Tocantins states.\nZakayo Cheruiyot (born 1954) is a Kenyan politician.Cheruiyot was educated at the University of Nairobi in Political Science. He was a District Officer in Central Province, then Deputy Provincial Commissioner for the Rift Valley Province from 1987. From 1997 to 2003, he was Permanent Secretary for Internal Security under President Daniel arap Moi. He was dismissed by the incoming Kibaki government.Re elected Member of the National Assembly of Kenya under new constitution for Kuresoi  South constituency in Nakuru County new United Republican Party URP.Close ally of newly elected Deputy President William Ruto Samoei.Friends with Emmanuel Kiprono Chirchir Kiberton,A consultant in Kiberton Consulting & Projects Limited,Head of Business and Marketing-Article Designs,Nairobi.Once belonged to the Orange Democratic Movement and was elected to represent the Kuresoi Constituency in the National Assembly of Kenya since the 2007 Kenyan parliamentary election.He was re-elected a Member of the National Assembly of Kenya under the new constitution for Kuresoi  South constituency in Nakuru County with the new United Republican Party (URP). He is a close ally of newly elected Deputy President William Ruto Samoei. He is friends with Emmanuel Kiprono Chirchir Kiberton, a consultant in Kiberton Consulting & Projects Limited, Head of Business and Marketing-Article Designs, Nairobi.He is a Kipsigis by ethnicity. Cheruiyot is the most respected politician in Kenya due to his principles of fighting for community justice.\nMarvin Pierce (June 17, 1893 \u2013 July 17, 1969) was president of McCall Corporation, the publisher of the popular women's magazines Redbook and McCall's. He was the father of United States First Lady Barbara Pierce Bush, the maternal grandfather of former U.S. President George W. Bush and former Florida Governor Jeb Bush, and the father-in-law of former U.S. President George H. W. Bush.\n", "path": ["santa barbara high school", "United States of America", "English", "England", "London"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the indigenous to of the official language of the country location of battle of cold harbor?", "correct_answer": "England", "model_answer": " [/INST] The official language of the country location of the Battle of Cold Harbor is English.\n\nExplanation: The Battle of Cold Harbor took place in the United States of America, specifically in Virginia. The United States is a country comprising 5", "context": "The Battle of Cold Harbor was fought during the American Civil War near Mechanicsville, Virginia, from May 31 to June 12, 1864, with the most significant fighting occurring on June 3. It was one of the final battles of Union Lt. Gen. Ulysses S. Grant's Overland Campaign, and is remembered as one of American history's bloodiest, most lopsided battles. Thousands of Union soldiers were killed or wounded in a hopeless frontal assault against the fortified positions of Confederate Gen. Robert E. Lee's army.On May 31, as Grant's army once again swung around the right flank of Lee's army, Union cavalry seized the crossroads of Old Cold Harbor, about 10 miles northeast of the Confederate capital of Richmond, Virginia, holding it against Confederate attacks until the Union infantry arrived. Both Grant and Lee, whose armies had suffered enormous casualties in the Overland Campaign, received reinforcements. On the evening of June 1, the Union VI Corps and XVIII Corps arrived and assaulted the Confederate works to the west of the crossroads with some success.On June 2, the remainder of both armies arrived and the Confederates built an elaborate series of fortifications 7 miles long. At dawn on June 3, three Union corps attacked the Confederate works on the southern end of the line and were easily repulsed with heavy casualties. Attempts to assault the northern end of the line and to resume the assaults on the southern were unsuccessful.Grant said of the battle in his Personal Memoirs, \"I have always regretted that the last assault at Cold Harbor was ever made. ... No advantage whatever was gained to compensate for the heavy loss we sustained.\" The armies confronted each other on these lines until the night of June 12, when Grant again advanced by his left flank, marching to the James River.  It was an impressive defensive victory for Lee, but it was one of his last in the war.  In the final stage, he entrenched himself within besieged Petersburg before finally fleeing westward across Virginia.\nThe United States of America (USA), commonly known as the United States (U.S. or US) or America, is a country comprising 50 states, a federal district, five major self-governing territories, and various possessions. At 3.8 million sq mi (9.8 million km2), the United States is the world's third or fourth largest country by total area and is slightly smaller than the entire continent of Europe's 3.93 million sq mi (10.2 million km2). With a population of more than 327 million people, the U.S. is the third most populous country. Most of the country is located contiguously in North America between Canada and Mexico. The extremely diverse geography, climate, and wildlife of the United States make it one of the world's 17 megadiverse countries.Paleo-Indians migrated from Siberia to the North American mainland at least 12,000 years ago. European colonization began in the 16th century. The United States emerged from the thirteen British colonies established along the East Coast. Following the French and Indian War, numerous disputes between Great Britain and the colonies led to the American Revolution, which began in 1775, and the subsequent Declaration of Independence in 1776. The war ended in 1783 with the United States becoming the first country to gain independence from a European power. The current constitution was adopted in 1788, with the first ten amendments, collectively named the Bill of Rights, being ratified in 1791 to guarantee many fundamental civil liberties. The United States embarked on a vigorous expansion across North America throughout the 19th century, acquiring new territories, displacing Native American tribes, and gradually admitting new states until it spanned the continent by 1848.During the second half of the 19th century, the Civil War led to the abolition of slavery. By the end of the century, the United States had extended into the Pacific Ocean, and its economy, driven in large part by the Industrial Revolution, began to soar. The Spanish\u2013American War and World War I confirmed the country's status as a global military power. The United States emerged from World War II as a global superpower and a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council. The end of the Cold War and the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 left the United States as the world's sole superpower.The United States is a federal republic and a representative democracy. It is a founding member of the United Nations, World Bank, International Monetary Fund, Organization of American States (OAS), and many other international organizations. The United States is a highly developed country, with the world's largest economy by nominal GDP and second-largest economy by PPP, accounting for approximately a quarter of global GDP. The U.S. economy is largely post-industrial, characterized by the dominance of services and knowledge-based activities, although the manufacturing sector remains the second-largest in the world. The United States is the world's largest importer and the second largest exporter of goods, by value. Although its population is only 4.3% of the world total, the U.S. holds 31% of the total wealth in the world, the largest share of global wealth concentrated in a single country.Despite income and wealth disparities, the United States continues to rank very high in measures of socioeconomic performance, including average wage, human development, per capita GDP, and worker productivity. The United States is the foremost military power in the world, making up a third of global military spending, and is a leading political, cultural, and scientific force internationally.\nSeville Theatre, also known as the Bryn Mawr Theatre, is a historic theatre building located at Lower Merion Township, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania. It was built in 1926, and is a two-story, three bay wide, rectangular steel frame building in the Beaux-Arts style.  It measures 56 feet wide and 265 feet deep.  It was designed by noted theatre architect William Harold Lee (1884-1971).It was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 2005.\nEngland is a country that is part of the United Kingdom. It shares land borders with Wales to the west and Scotland to the north. The Irish Sea lies west of England and the Celtic Sea to the southwest. England is separated from continental Europe by the North Sea to the east and the English Channel to the south. The country covers five-eighths of the island of Great Britain, which lies in the North Atlantic, and includes over 100 smaller islands, such as the Isles of Scilly and the Isle of Wight.The area now called England was first inhabited by modern humans during the Upper Palaeolithic period, but takes its name from the Angles, a Germanic tribe deriving its name from the Anglia peninsula, who settled during the 5th and 6th centuries. England became a unified state in the 10th century, and since the Age of Discovery, which began during the 15th century, has had a significant cultural and legal impact on the wider world. The English language, the Anglican Church, and English law \u2013 the basis for the common law legal systems of many other countries around the world \u2013 developed in England, and the country's parliamentary system of government has been widely adopted by other nations. The Industrial Revolution began in 18th-century England, transforming its society into the world's first industrialised nation.England's terrain is chiefly low hills and plains, especially in central and southern England. However, there is upland and mountainous terrain in the north (for example, the Lake District and Pennines) and in the west (for example, Dartmoor and the Shropshire Hills). The capital is London, which has the largest metropolitan area in both the United Kingdom and the European Union. England's population of over 55 million comprises 84% of the population of the United Kingdom, largely concentrated around London, the South East, and conurbations in the Midlands, the North West, the North East, and Yorkshire, which each developed as major industrial regions during the 19th century.The Kingdom of England \u2013 which after 1535 included Wales \u2013 ceased being a separate sovereign state on 1 May 1707, when the Acts of Union put into effect the terms agreed in the Treaty of Union the previous year, resulting in a political union with the Kingdom of Scotland to create the Kingdom of Great Britain. In 1801, Great Britain was united with the Kingdom of Ireland (through another Act of Union) to become the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland. In 1922 the Irish Free State seceded from the United Kingdom, leading to the latter being renamed the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.\nCatalpa ovata, the yellow catalpa or Chinese catalpa (Chinese: \u6893; pinyin: z\u01d0), is a pod-bearing tree native to China. Compared to C. speciosa, it is much smaller, typically reaching heights between 20 and 30 feet (6 and 9 m). The inflorescences form 4\u201310-inch-long (100\u2013250 mm) bunches of creamy white flowers with distinctly yellow tinging; individual flowers are about 1 inch (25 mm) wide. They bloom in July and August. The leaves are very similar in shape to those of Paulownia tomentosa, having three lobes (two are abruptly truncated on either edge, with a third, central, slightly acute, pointed lobe forming the leaf apex), and are darkly green. Fruits are very narrow, foot-long pods.Although native to the more temperate provinces within China (Anhui, Gansu, Hebei, Heilongjiang, Henan, Hubei, Jiangsu, Jilin, Liaoning, Nei Monggol, Ningxia, Qinghai, Shaanxi, Shandong, Shanxi, Sichuan, Xinjiang), C. ovata is also cultivated in North America and Europe. It is commonly used to make the undersides of qin.\nPicasso's Rose Period represents an important epoch in the life and work of the Spanish artist Pablo Picasso and had a great impact on the developments of modern art. It began in 1904 at a time when Picasso settled in Montmartre at the Bateau-Lavoir among bohemian poets and writers. Following Picasso's Blue Period, depicting themes of poverty, loneliness, and despair in somber tones of daunting blues, Picasso's Rose Period represents more pleasant themes of clowns, harlequins, and carnival performers, depicted in cheerful vivid hues of red, orange, pink and earth tones.Based largely on intuition rather than direct observation, Picasso's Rose Period marks the beginning of the artists' stylistic experiments with primitivism; influenced by pre-Roman Iberian sculpture, Oceanic and African art. This led to Picasso's African Period in 1907, culminating in the Proto-Cubist Les Demoiselles d'Avignon, regarded as a masterpiece.\nPhilip I. Marcus (June 3, 1927 in Springfield, Massachusetts \u2013 September 1, 2013 in Farmington, Connecticut) was an American virologist and a leader in interferon research. From 2003 he was a Board of Trustees Distinguished Professor of Molecular and Cell Biology at the University of Connecticut.\nEnglish is a West Germanic language that was first spoken in early medieval England and eventually became a global lingua franca. It is named after the Angles, one of the Germanic tribes that migrated to the area of Great Britain that later took their name, as England. Both names derive from Anglia, a peninsula in the Baltic Sea. The language is closely related to Frisian and Low Saxon, and its vocabulary has been significantly influenced by other Germanic languages, particularly Norse (a North Germanic language), and to a greater extent by Latin and French.English has developed over the course of more than 1,400 years. The earliest forms of English, a group of West Germanic (Ingvaeonic) dialects brought to Great Britain by Anglo-Saxon settlers in the 5th century, are collectively called Old English. Middle English began in the late 11th century with the Norman conquest of England; this was a period in which the language was influenced by French. Early Modern English began in the late 15th century with the introduction of the printing press to London, the printing of the King James Bible and the start of the Great Vowel Shift.Through the worldwide influence of the British Empire, and later the United States, Modern English has been spreading around the world since the 17th century. Through all types of printed and electronic media, and spurred by the emergence of the United States as a global superpower, English has become the leading language of international discourse and the lingua franca in many regions and professional contexts such as science, navigation and law.English is the largest language by number of speakers, and the third most-spoken native language in the world, after Standard Chinese and Spanish. It is the most widely learned second language and is either the official language or one of the official languages in almost 60 sovereign states. There are more people who have learned it as a second language than there are native speakers. It is estimated that there are over 2 billion speakers of English. English is the most commonly spoken language in the United Kingdom, the United States, Canada, Australia, Ireland and New Zealand, and it is widely spoken in some areas of the Caribbean, Africa and South Asia. It is a co-official language of the United Nations, the European Union and many other world and regional international organisations. It is the most widely spoken Germanic language, accounting for at least 70% of speakers of this Indo-European branch. English has a vast vocabulary, though counting how many words any language has is impossible. English speakers are called \"Anglophones\".Modern English grammar is the result of a gradual change from a typical Indo-European dependent marking pattern, with a rich inflectional morphology and relatively free word order, to a mostly analytic pattern with little inflection, a fairly fixed SVO word order and a complex syntax. Modern English relies more on auxiliary verbs and word order for the expression of complex tenses, aspect and mood, as well as passive constructions, interrogatives and some negation. The variation among the accents and dialects of English used in different countries and regions\u2014in terms of phonetics and phonology, and sometimes also vocabulary, grammar, and spelling\u2014can often be understood by speakers of different dialects, but in extreme cases can lead to confusion or even mutual unintelligibility between English speakers.\n", "path": ["battle of cold harbor", "United States of America", "English", "England"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the legislative body of the country location of origin of the continent of the country location of citizenship of rieding?", "correct_answer": "the riksdag", "model_answer": " [/INST] The Riksdag is the legislative body of Sweden, which is the country of origin of Oskar Rieding. Oskar Rieding was a German violinist, teacher of music, and composer. However, his", "context": "Oskar Rieding (1840\u20131918) was a German violinist, teacher of music, and composer.\nNedim \u0110edovi\u0107 (born February 16, 1997) is a Bosnian professional basketball player who last played for S\u00e1enz Horeca Araberri of the LEB Oro. He is a 205 cm tall small forward. He is the younger brother of basketball player Nihad \u0110edovi\u0107.\nThe Riksdag (Swedish: riksdagen or Sveriges riksdag) is the national legislature and the supreme decision-making body of Sweden. Since 1971, the Riksdag has been a unicameral legislature with 349 members (riksdagsledam\u00f6ter), elected proportionally and serving, from 1994 onwards, on fixed four-year terms.The constitutional functions of the Riksdag are enumerated in the Instrument of Government (Regeringsformen), and its internal workings are specified in greater detail in the Riksdag Act (Riksdagsordningen).The seat of the Riksdag is at Parliament House (Swedish: Riksdagshuset), on the island of Helgeandsholmen in the central parts of Stockholm. The Riksdag has its institutional roots in the feudal Riksdag of the Estates, by tradition thought to have first assembled in Arboga in 1435, and in 1866 following reforms of the 1809 Instrument of Government that body was transformed into a bicameral legislature with an upper chamber (F\u00f6rsta Kammaren) and a lower chamber (Andra Kammaren).The most recent general election was held on 9 September 2018.\nB\u00e9la Ap\u00e1ti Abkarovics (born 1888, \u00c9rmih\u00e1lyfalva, Austro-Hungarian Empire - died 1957, Szentendre, Hungary) was a Hungarian painter and graphic artist. His art is based upon the Nagyb\u00e1nya traditions of the unity of man and nature. He incorporated oil, watercolour and graphics into his art. His contribution in the field of graphic arts include sketches, linocuts, and monotypes.\nEurope is a Swedish rock band formed in Upplands V\u00e4sby in 1979,  by vocalist Joey Tempest, guitarist John Norum, bassist Peter Olsson, and drummer Tony Reno. They got a major breakthrough in Sweden in 1982 by winning the televised competition \"Rock-SM\" (Swedish Rock Championships): it was the first time this competition was held, and Europe became a larger success than the competition itself.Since their formation, Europe has released eleven studio albums, three live albums, three compilations and twenty-four music videos.Europe rose to international fame in the 1980s with their third album, 1986's The Final Countdown, which has sold over 3 million copies in the United States and 15 million copies worldwide (including album and single). Europe have sold over 25 million records worldwide.  The band has had two top 20 albums on the Billboard 200 chart (The Final Countdown  and Out of This World) and three top 30 singles on the Billboard Hot 100 chart (\"The Final Countdown\", \"Rock the Night\" and \"Carrie\").Europe went on hiatus in 1992, reunited temporarily for a one-off performance in Stockholm on New Year's Eve 1999 and announced an official reunion in 2003. Since then the band has released six albums, Start from the Dark (2004), Secret Society (2006), Last Look at Eden (2009), Bag of Bones (2012), War of Kings (2015) and Walk the Earth (2017).Europe has achieved new attention in the US due to being featured in a GEICO Insurance cable television commercial campaign viewed for many months across the US in 2015\u201316.The band is mainly influenced by Whitesnake, Deep Purple, Rainbow, Led Zeppelin, Thin Lizzy, UFO and Michael Schenker Group.\nTodacheene Lake (Navajo: t\u00f3 d\u00edch'\u00edi'nii, meaning \"bitter water\") is a small lake in the crater of the Narbona Pass volcano, in San Juan County, New Mexico, within the Navajo Nation.The lake has been stocked with rainbow trout.Todacheene Lake and Aspen, Berland and Toadlena lakes are designated for recreational use in the Shiprock area.There is a relatively easy cross-country ski trail along an old dirt road in the crater from BIA32 to Todacheene Lake, a 3 miles (4.8 km) round trip with a vertical gain of 200 feet (61 m).The nearest populated place is Crystal, New Mexico, about 6.5 miles (10.5 km) from the lake to the west of the pass.\nGermany (German: Deutschland, German pronunciation: [\u02c8d\u0254\u028ft\u0283lant]), officially the Federal Republic of Germany (German: Bundesrepublik Deutschland, listen ), is a country in Central and Western Europe, lying between the Baltic and North Seas to the north and the Alps, Lake Constance and the High Rhine to the south. It borders Denmark to the north, Poland and the Czech Republic to the east, Austria and Switzerland to the south, France to the southwest, and Luxembourg, Belgium and the Netherlands to the west.Germany includes 16 constituent states, covers an area of 357,386 square kilometres (137,988 sq mi), and has a largely temperate seasonal climate. With 83 million inhabitants, it is the second most populous state of Europe after Russia, the most populous state lying entirely in Europe, as well as the most populous member state of the European Union. Germany is a very decentralised country. Its capital and largest metropolis is Berlin, while Frankfurt serves as its financial capital and has the country's busiest airport. Germany's largest urban area is the Ruhr, with its main centres of Dortmund and Essen. The country's other major cities are Hamburg, Munich, Cologne, Stuttgart, D\u00fcsseldorf, Leipzig, Bremen, Dresden, Hanover, and Nuremberg.Various Germanic tribes have inhabited the northern parts of modern Germany since classical antiquity. A region named Germania was documented before AD 100. During the Migration Period, the Germanic tribes expanded southward. Beginning in the 10th century, German territories formed a central part of the Holy Roman Empire. During the 16th century, northern German regions became the centre of the Protestant Reformation. After the collapse of the Holy Roman Empire, the German Confederation was formed in 1815. The German revolutions of 1848\u201349 resulted in the Frankfurt Parliament establishing major democratic rights.In 1871, Germany became a nation state when most of the German states unified (except Switzerland and Austria) into the Prussian-dominated German Empire. After World War I and the revolution of 1918\u201319, the Empire was replaced by the parliamentary Weimar Republic. The Nazi seizure of power in 1933 led to the establishment of a dictatorship, the annexation of Austria, World War II, and the Holocaust. After the end of World War II in Europe and a period of Allied occupation, Austria was re-established as an independent country and two new German states were founded: West Germany, formed from the American, British, and French occupation zones, and East Germany, formed from the Soviet occupation zone. About a quarter of Germany's pre-war territory was annexed by Poland and the Soviet Union leading to the expulsion of Germans. Following the Revolutions of 1989 that ended communist rule in Central and Eastern Europe, the country was reunified on 3 October 1990.Today, the sovereign state of Germany is a federal parliamentary republic led by a chancellor. It is a great power with a strong economy; it has the world's fourth-largest economy by nominal GDP, and the fifth-largest by PPP. As a global leader in several industrial and technological sectors, it is both the world's third-largest exporter and importer of goods. As a highly developed country with a very high standard of living, it upholds a social security and universal health care system, environmental protection, and a tuition-free university education.The Federal Republic of Germany was a founding member of the European Economic Community in 1957 and the European Union in 1993. It is part of the Schengen Area and became a co-founder of the Eurozone in 1999. Germany is a member of the United Nations, NATO, the G7, the G20, and the OECD. Known for its rich cultural history, Germany has been continuously the home of influential and successful artists, philosophers, writers, musicians, film people, sportspeople, entrepreneurs, scientists, engineers, and inventors. Germany has a large number of World Heritage sites and is among the top tourism destinations in the world.\nThe Albuquerque Metropolitan Statistical Area is a metropolitan area in central New Mexico centered on the city of Albuquerque comprising four counties: Bernalillo, Sandoval, Torrance, and Valencia. As of the 2010 United States Census, the MSA had a population of 887,077. The population is estimated to be 915,927 as of the July 1, 2018 Census estimate. The Albuquerque MSA forms a part of the larger Albuquerque\u2013Santa Fe\u2013Las Vegas combined statistical area.\nSweden (Swedish: Sverige [\u02c8sv\u00e6rj\u025b] (listen)), formal name: the Kingdom of Sweden (Swedish: Konungariket Sverige ), is a Scandinavian Nordic country in Northern Europe. It borders Norway to the west and north and Finland to the east, and is connected to Denmark in the southwest by a bridge-tunnel across the \u00d6resund, a strait at the Swedish-Danish border. At 450,295 square kilometres (173,860 sq mi), Sweden is the largest country in Northern Europe, the third-largest country in the European Union and the fifth largest country in Europe by area. Sweden has a total population of 10.3 million of which 2.5 million have a foreign background. It has a low population density of 22 inhabitants per square kilometre (57/sq mi). The highest concentration is in the central and southern half of the country.Sweden is part of the geographical area of Fennoscandia. The climate is in general very mild for its northerly latitude due to significant maritime influence. In spite of the high latitude, Sweden often has warm continental summers, being located in between the North Atlantic, the Baltic Sea and the vast Eurasian Russian landmass. The general climate and environment varies significantly from the south and north due to the vast latitudal difference and much of Sweden has reliably cold and snowy winters. It also has a vast coastline with many offshore islands, many lakes, a large proportion of the country covered by forests and includes a portion of the Scandinavian Mountains.Germanic peoples have inhabited Sweden since prehistoric times, emerging into history as the Geats (Swedish G\u00f6tar) and Swedes (Svear) and constituting the sea peoples known as the Norsemen. Southern Sweden is predominantly agricultural, while the north is heavily forested.  Today,  the sovereign state of Sweden is a constitutional monarchy and parliamentary democracy, with a monarch as head of state, like its neighbour Norway. The capital city is Stockholm, which is also the most populous city in the country. Legislative power is vested in the 349-member unicameral Riksdag. Executive power is exercised by the government chaired by the prime minister. Sweden is a unitary state, currently divided into 21 counties and 290 municipalities.An independent Swedish state emerged during the early 12th century. After the Black Death in the middle of the 14th century killed about a third of the Scandinavian population, the Hanseatic League threatened Scandinavia's culture, finances and languages. This led to the forming of the Scandinavian Kalmar Union in 1397, which Sweden left in 1523. When Sweden became involved in the Thirty Years War on the Reformist side, an expansion of its territories began and eventually the Swedish Empire was formed. This became one of the great powers of Europe until the early 18th century. Swedish territories outside the Scandinavian Peninsula were gradually lost during the 18th and 19th centuries, ending with the annexation of present-day Finland by Russia in 1809. The last war in which Sweden was directly involved was in 1814, when Norway was militarily forced into personal union. Since then, Sweden has been at peace, maintaining an official policy of neutrality in foreign affairs. The union with Norway was peacefully dissolved in 1905. Sweden was formally neutral through both world wars and the Cold War, albeit Sweden has since 2009 openly moved towards cooperation with NATO. Sweden has close relations to its Nordic neighbours, including linguistically, with the Swedish language being an official language in Finland and Swedish also being mutually intelligible with Danish and Norwegian.After the end of the Cold War, Sweden joined the European Union (EU) on 1 January 1995, but declined NATO membership, as well as Eurozone (EZ) membership following a referendum. It is also a member of the United Nations, the Nordic Council, the Council of Europe, the World Trade Organization and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). Sweden maintains a Nordic social welfare system that provides universal health care and tertiary education for its citizens. It has the world's eleventh-highest per capita income and ranks highly in numerous metrics of national performance, including quality of life, health, education, protection of civil liberties, economic competitiveness, equality, prosperity and human development.\n", "path": ["rieding", "Germany", "Europe", "Sweden", "the riksdag"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the place of death of the child of the creator of portrait of giovanna tornabuoni?", "correct_answer": "Florence", "model_answer": " [/INST] The child depicted in the portrait of Giovanna Tornabuoni by Domenico Ghirlandaio was not the painter's own child. Domenico Ghirlandaio passed away on January 11, 1", "context": "Florence ( FLORR-\u0259nss; Italian: Firenze [fi\u02c8r\u025bntse] (listen)) is a city in central Italy and the capital city of the Tuscany region. It is the most populous city in Tuscany, with 383,084 inhabitants in 2013, and over 1,520,000 in its metropolitan area.Florence was a centre of medieval European trade and finance and one of the wealthiest cities of that era. It is considered by main academics the birthplace of the Renaissance, and has been called \"the Athens of the Middle Ages\". Its turbulent political history includes periods of rule by the powerful Medici family and numerous religious and republican revolutions. From 1865 to 1871 the city served as the capital of the Kingdom of Italy (established in 1861). The Florentine dialect forms the base of Standard Italian and it became the language of culture throughout Italy due to the prestige of the masterpieces by Dante Alighieri, Petrarch, Giovanni Boccaccio, Niccol\u00f2 Machiavelli and Francesco Guicciardini.The city attracts millions of tourists each year, and UNESCO declared the Historic Centre of Florence a World Heritage Site in 1982. The city is noted for its culture,  Renaissance art and architecture and monuments. The city also contains numerous museums and art galleries, such as the Uffizi Gallery and the Palazzo Pitti, and still exerts an influence in the fields of art, culture and politics. Due to Florence's artistic and architectural heritage, Forbes has ranked it as one of the most beautiful cities in the world.Florence plays an important role in Italian fashion, and is ranked by in the top 15 fashion capitals of the world by Global Language Monitor; furthermore, it is a major national economic centre, as well as a tourist and industrial hub. In 2008 the city had the 17th-highest average income in Italy.\nEndeavour Learning and Skills Centre is a centre operated by Hull Training & Adult Education (formerly HCC Training) offering adult education and further education.\nJean-Paul Van Belle is a professor of information technology and director at the Centre for Information Technology and National Development in Africa at the University of Cape Town. He was head of the department of Information Technology at the University of Cape Town from 2008 to 2011.Van Belle has written over 120 published peer reviewed articles in the fields of service-oriented architecture, unified communications within businesses, open source software, mobile computing, and information and communication technologies for development.In 2012 he established the UCT-Samsung Mobile Innovation Lab at the University of Cape Town.In 2011 Van Belle was the first person to photograph the Mascho-Piro people whilst on vacation in Peru.\nRidolfo Ghirlandaio (or Ghirlandajo) (Florence 14 February 1483 \u2013 6 June 1561) was an Italian Renaissance painter active mainly in Florence. Ridolfo Ghirlandaio was the son of the Italian Renaissance painter Domenico Ghirlandaio.\nThe Portrait of Giovanna Tornabuoni (also known as Portrait of Giovanna degli Albizzi ) is a painting by the Italian Renaissance painter Domenico Ghirlandaio, executed in 1488 and located in the Museo Thyssen-Bornemisza, Madrid. The portrait was commissioned by Lorenzo Tornabuoni after his wife's death in 1488 and includes many symbolic details.\nJakkrit Panichpatikum (Thai: \u0e08\u0e31\u0e01\u0e23\u0e01\u0e24\u0e29\u0e13\u0e4c \u0e1e\u0e13\u0e34\u0e0a\u0e22\u0e4c\u0e1c\u0e32\u0e15\u0e34\u0e01\u0e23\u0e23\u0e21; RTGS: Chakkrit Phanitphatikam; January 31, 1973 \u2013 October 19, 2013) was a Thai sport shooter who competed in the men's 10 metre air pistol, men's 50m pistol, and men's 25m rapid fire pistol.At the 2012 Summer Olympics, he finished 37th in the qualifying round for the 10 metre air pistol event.  He finished in 14th in the qualifying round for the 50 metre pistol competition and 15th in the qualifying round for the men's 25 metre rapid fire pistol.\nFort Sumter is a sea fort in Charleston, South Carolina, notable for two battles of the American Civil War. It was one of a number of special forts planned after the War of 1812, combining high walls and heavy masonry, and classified as Third System, as a grade of structural integrity. Work started in 1829, but was incomplete by 1860, when South Carolina seceded from the Union.The First Battle of Fort Sumter began on April 12, 1861, when Confederate artillery fired on the Union garrison. These were the first shots of the war and continued all day, watched by many civilians in a celebratory spirit. The fort had been cut off from its supply line and surrendered the next day. The Second Battle of Fort Sumter (September 8, 1863) was a failed attempt by the Union to retake the fort, dogged by a rivalry between army and navy commanders. Although the fort was reduced to rubble, it remained in Confederate hands until it was evacuated as General Sherman marched through South Carolina in February 1865.Fort Sumter is open for public tours as part of the Fort Sumter and Fort Moultrie National Historical Park operated by the National Park Service.\nDomenico Ghirlandaio (UK: , US: , Italian: [do\u02c8me\u02d0niko \u0261irlan\u02c8da\u02d0jo]; 2 June 1448 \u2013 11 January 1494), also spelled as Ghirlandajo, was an Italian Renaissance painter born in Florence.  Ghirlandaio was part of the so-called \"third generation\" of the Florentine Renaissance, along with Verrocchio, the Pollaiolo brothers and Sandro Botticelli. Ghirlandaio led a large and efficient workshop that included his brothers  Davide Ghirlandaio and Benedetto Ghirlandaio, his brother-in-law Bastiano Mainardi from San Gimignano, and later his son Ridolfo Ghirlandaio. Many apprentices passed through Ghirlandaio's workshop, including the famous Michelangelo.   Ghirlandaio's particular talent lay in his ability to posit depictions of contemporary life and portraits of contemporary people within the context of religious narratives, bringing him great popularity and many large commissions.\n", "path": ["portrait of giovanna tornabuoni", "domenico ghirlandai", "ridolfo ghirlandaio", "Florence"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the continent of the indigenous to of the languages spoken, written, or signed of Myron H. McCord?", "correct_answer": "Europe", "model_answer": " [/INST] Myron H. McCord is an American politician, businessman, and military officer, and his native language is English. English is a West Germanic language that originated in England and has been widely influenced by other Germanic languages, particularly Nor", "context": "Europe is a Swedish rock band formed in Upplands V\u00e4sby in 1979,  by vocalist Joey Tempest, guitarist John Norum, bassist Peter Olsson, and drummer Tony Reno. They got a major breakthrough in Sweden in 1982 by winning the televised competition \"Rock-SM\" (Swedish Rock Championships): it was the first time this competition was held, and Europe became a larger success than the competition itself.Since their formation, Europe has released eleven studio albums, three live albums, three compilations and twenty-four music videos.Europe rose to international fame in the 1980s with their third album, 1986's The Final Countdown, which has sold over 3 million copies in the United States and 15 million copies worldwide (including album and single). Europe have sold over 25 million records worldwide.  The band has had two top 20 albums on the Billboard 200 chart (The Final Countdown  and Out of This World) and three top 30 singles on the Billboard Hot 100 chart (\"The Final Countdown\", \"Rock the Night\" and \"Carrie\").Europe went on hiatus in 1992, reunited temporarily for a one-off performance in Stockholm on New Year's Eve 1999 and announced an official reunion in 2003. Since then the band has released six albums, Start from the Dark (2004), Secret Society (2006), Last Look at Eden (2009), Bag of Bones (2012), War of Kings (2015) and Walk the Earth (2017).Europe has achieved new attention in the US due to being featured in a GEICO Insurance cable television commercial campaign viewed for many months across the US in 2015\u201316.The band is mainly influenced by Whitesnake, Deep Purple, Rainbow, Led Zeppelin, Thin Lizzy, UFO and Michael Schenker Group.\nSugisaki Station (\u6749\u5d0e\u99c5, Sugisaki-eki) is a railway station on the Takayama Main Line in the city of Hida,  Gifu Prefecture, Japan, operated by Central Japan Railway Company (JR Central).\nEnglish is a West Germanic language that was first spoken in early medieval England and eventually became a global lingua franca. It is named after the Angles, one of the Germanic tribes that migrated to the area of Great Britain that later took their name, as England. Both names derive from Anglia, a peninsula in the Baltic Sea. The language is closely related to Frisian and Low Saxon, and its vocabulary has been significantly influenced by other Germanic languages, particularly Norse (a North Germanic language), and to a greater extent by Latin and French.English has developed over the course of more than 1,400 years. The earliest forms of English, a group of West Germanic (Ingvaeonic) dialects brought to Great Britain by Anglo-Saxon settlers in the 5th century, are collectively called Old English. Middle English began in the late 11th century with the Norman conquest of England; this was a period in which the language was influenced by French. Early Modern English began in the late 15th century with the introduction of the printing press to London, the printing of the King James Bible and the start of the Great Vowel Shift.Through the worldwide influence of the British Empire, and later the United States, Modern English has been spreading around the world since the 17th century. Through all types of printed and electronic media, and spurred by the emergence of the United States as a global superpower, English has become the leading language of international discourse and the lingua franca in many regions and professional contexts such as science, navigation and law.English is the largest language by number of speakers, and the third most-spoken native language in the world, after Standard Chinese and Spanish. It is the most widely learned second language and is either the official language or one of the official languages in almost 60 sovereign states. There are more people who have learned it as a second language than there are native speakers. It is estimated that there are over 2 billion speakers of English. English is the most commonly spoken language in the United Kingdom, the United States, Canada, Australia, Ireland and New Zealand, and it is widely spoken in some areas of the Caribbean, Africa and South Asia. It is a co-official language of the United Nations, the European Union and many other world and regional international organisations. It is the most widely spoken Germanic language, accounting for at least 70% of speakers of this Indo-European branch. English has a vast vocabulary, though counting how many words any language has is impossible. English speakers are called \"Anglophones\".Modern English grammar is the result of a gradual change from a typical Indo-European dependent marking pattern, with a rich inflectional morphology and relatively free word order, to a mostly analytic pattern with little inflection, a fairly fixed SVO word order and a complex syntax. Modern English relies more on auxiliary verbs and word order for the expression of complex tenses, aspect and mood, as well as passive constructions, interrogatives and some negation. The variation among the accents and dialects of English used in different countries and regions\u2014in terms of phonetics and phonology, and sometimes also vocabulary, grammar, and spelling\u2014can often be understood by speakers of different dialects, but in extreme cases can lead to confusion or even mutual unintelligibility between English speakers.\nThe Mamainse Point Formation is a geologic formation in Algoma District in northeastern Ontario, Canada. It is located about 64 km (40 mi) north of Sault Ste. Marie along Lake Superior and consists of volcanics related to volcanism of the Midcontinent Rift System.\nMyron Hawley McCord (November 26, 1840 \u2013 April 27, 1908) was an American politician, businessman, and military officer. He began his career in Wisconsin where he held a number of elected offices before representing Wisconsin's 9th district in the United States House of Representatives for a single term. After undergoing a bankruptcy, McCord moved to Arizona Territory. There he was appointed territorial governor by his friend, William McKinley. After a year in office, McCord resigned as governor to serve as an officer in the United States Volunteers.\nCaligula's \"Giant Ship\", also known as the 'round ship', was a very large barge whose ruins were found during the construction of Rome's Leonardo da Vinci International Airport in Fiumicino, Italy. This was previously a Roman port a few kilometres north of Ostia at the mouth of the Tiber River.This Roman barge had a length of between 95 and 104 metres (312 and 341 ft) and a beam of about 20.3 m (66 ft). It was six decks high, displaced a minimum of 7400 tons, and carried a crew of 700\u2013800. Pliny the Elder describes the sinking of an 800-ton obelisk ship that had transported the St. Peter's Square obelisk from Egypt. It was filled with concrete to create an artificial mole that enclosed an anchorage and to be used as the foundation of a large lighthouse in Ostia. This lighthouse was an imitation of the famous lighthouse in Alexandria, the Pharos of Alexandria.\nPaul John Harding (born 6 March 1964) is an English former professional footballer. He played 119 games in the Football League representing Notts County, Southend United, Watford, Birmingham City and Cardiff City. He played as a midfielder.\nEngland is a country that is part of the United Kingdom. It shares land borders with Wales to the west and Scotland to the north. The Irish Sea lies west of England and the Celtic Sea to the southwest. England is separated from continental Europe by the North Sea to the east and the English Channel to the south. The country covers five-eighths of the island of Great Britain, which lies in the North Atlantic, and includes over 100 smaller islands, such as the Isles of Scilly and the Isle of Wight.The area now called England was first inhabited by modern humans during the Upper Palaeolithic period, but takes its name from the Angles, a Germanic tribe deriving its name from the Anglia peninsula, who settled during the 5th and 6th centuries. England became a unified state in the 10th century, and since the Age of Discovery, which began during the 15th century, has had a significant cultural and legal impact on the wider world. The English language, the Anglican Church, and English law \u2013 the basis for the common law legal systems of many other countries around the world \u2013 developed in England, and the country's parliamentary system of government has been widely adopted by other nations. The Industrial Revolution began in 18th-century England, transforming its society into the world's first industrialised nation.England's terrain is chiefly low hills and plains, especially in central and southern England. However, there is upland and mountainous terrain in the north (for example, the Lake District and Pennines) and in the west (for example, Dartmoor and the Shropshire Hills). The capital is London, which has the largest metropolitan area in both the United Kingdom and the European Union. England's population of over 55 million comprises 84% of the population of the United Kingdom, largely concentrated around London, the South East, and conurbations in the Midlands, the North West, the North East, and Yorkshire, which each developed as major industrial regions during the 19th century.The Kingdom of England \u2013 which after 1535 included Wales \u2013 ceased being a separate sovereign state on 1 May 1707, when the Acts of Union put into effect the terms agreed in the Treaty of Union the previous year, resulting in a political union with the Kingdom of Scotland to create the Kingdom of Great Britain. In 1801, Great Britain was united with the Kingdom of Ireland (through another Act of Union) to become the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland. In 1922 the Irish Free State seceded from the United Kingdom, leading to the latter being renamed the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.\n", "path": ["Myron H. McCord", "English", "England", "Europe"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the replaces of the country location of congregation adath jeshurun?", "correct_answer": "the thirteen colonies", "model_answer": " [/INST] The Congregation Adath Jeshurun is currently located at 397 Blue Hill Avenue in the Roxbury neighborhood of Boston, Massachusetts, in the United States.\n\nExplanation: The context provides the current location of the", "context": "The Thirteen Colonies, also known as the Thirteen British Colonies or the Thirteen American Colonies, were a group of colonies of Great Britain on the Atlantic coast of America founded in the 17th and 18th centuries which declared independence in 1776 and formed the United States of America. The Thirteen Colonies had very similar political, constitutional, and legal systems and were dominated by Protestant English-speakers. They were part of Britain's possessions in the New World, which also included colonies in Canada, the Caribbean, and Florida.Between 1625 and 1775, the colonial population grew from roughly 2,000 to 2.4 million, displacing American Indians. This population included people subject to a system of slavery which was legal in all of the colonies prior to the American Revolutionary War. In the 18th century, the British government operated its colonies under a policy of mercantilism, in which the central government administered its possessions for the economic benefit of the mother country. The Thirteen Colonies had a high degree of self-governance and active local elections, and they resisted London's demands for more control. The French and Indian War (1754\u201363) against France and its Indian allies led to growing tensions between Britain and the Thirteen Colonies. In the 1750s, the colonies began collaborating with one another instead of dealing directly with Britain. These inter-colonial activities cultivated a sense of shared American identity and led to calls for protection of the colonists' \"Rights as Englishmen\", especially the principle of \"no taxation without representation\". Grievances with the British government led to the American Revolution, in which the colonies collaborated in forming the Continental Congress. The colonists fought the American Revolutionary War (1775\u201383) with the aid of France and, to a significantly smaller degree, the Dutch Republic and Spain.\nSheq\u00ebs is a village in the former municipality of Lumas in Berat County, Albania. At the 2015 local government reform it became part of the municipality Ku\u00e7ov\u00eb.\nBrandywine Creek (also called the Brandywine River) is a tributary of the Christina River in southeastern Pennsylvania and northern Delaware in the United States. The Lower Brandywine (the main stem) is 20.4 miles (32.8 km) long and is a designated Pennsylvania Scenic River with several tributary streams. The East Branch and West Branch of the creek originate within 2 miles (3 km)  of each other on the slopes of Welsh Mountain in Honey Brook Township, Pennsylvania, about 20 miles (32 km) northwest of their confluence.The mouth of the creek on the Christina River in present-day Wilmington, Delaware, is the site of the New Sweden colony, where colonists first landed on March 29, 1638. The Battle of Brandywine was fought around the creek near Chadds Ford, Pennsylvania, on September 11, 1777, during the American Revolution.  Water powered gristmills in Brandywine Village, near the creek mouth, and the nearby DuPont gunpowder mill were important in developing American industry before the introduction of steam power.\nFrederick Drew Gregory (born January 7, 1941), (Col, USAF, Ret.), is a former United States Air Force pilot, military engineer, test pilot, and NASA astronaut as well as former NASA Deputy Administrator. He also served briefly as NASA Acting Administrator in early 2005, covering the period between the departure of Sean O'Keefe and the swearing in of Michael Griffin.\nCongregation Adath Jeshurun is a historic synagogue, now serving as a church, at 397 Blue Hill Avenue in the Roxbury neighborhood of Boston, Massachusetts.  As the Jewish community of Roxbury gradually moved away, its congregation dwindled and in 1967 it was sold to Ecclesia Apostolic Church.  It was purchased by its present owner, the First Haitian Baptist Church, in 1978.  The church has restored it to its present condition.The Romanesque style building was designed in 1906 by Frederick Norcross and David Krokyn and added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1999.\nThe list of ship launches in 1909 includes a chronological list of some ships launched in 1909.\nThe United States of America (USA), commonly known as the United States (U.S. or US) or America, is a country comprising 50 states, a federal district, five major self-governing territories, and various possessions. At 3.8 million sq mi (9.8 million km2), the United States is the world's third or fourth largest country by total area and is slightly smaller than the entire continent of Europe's 3.93 million sq mi (10.2 million km2). With a population of more than 327 million people, the U.S. is the third most populous country. Most of the country is located contiguously in North America between Canada and Mexico. The extremely diverse geography, climate, and wildlife of the United States make it one of the world's 17 megadiverse countries.Paleo-Indians migrated from Siberia to the North American mainland at least 12,000 years ago. European colonization began in the 16th century. The United States emerged from the thirteen British colonies established along the East Coast. Following the French and Indian War, numerous disputes between Great Britain and the colonies led to the American Revolution, which began in 1775, and the subsequent Declaration of Independence in 1776. The war ended in 1783 with the United States becoming the first country to gain independence from a European power. The current constitution was adopted in 1788, with the first ten amendments, collectively named the Bill of Rights, being ratified in 1791 to guarantee many fundamental civil liberties. The United States embarked on a vigorous expansion across North America throughout the 19th century, acquiring new territories, displacing Native American tribes, and gradually admitting new states until it spanned the continent by 1848.During the second half of the 19th century, the Civil War led to the abolition of slavery. By the end of the century, the United States had extended into the Pacific Ocean, and its economy, driven in large part by the Industrial Revolution, began to soar. The Spanish\u2013American War and World War I confirmed the country's status as a global military power. The United States emerged from World War II as a global superpower and a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council. The end of the Cold War and the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 left the United States as the world's sole superpower.The United States is a federal republic and a representative democracy. It is a founding member of the United Nations, World Bank, International Monetary Fund, Organization of American States (OAS), and many other international organizations. The United States is a highly developed country, with the world's largest economy by nominal GDP and second-largest economy by PPP, accounting for approximately a quarter of global GDP. The U.S. economy is largely post-industrial, characterized by the dominance of services and knowledge-based activities, although the manufacturing sector remains the second-largest in the world. The United States is the world's largest importer and the second largest exporter of goods, by value. Although its population is only 4.3% of the world total, the U.S. holds 31% of the total wealth in the world, the largest share of global wealth concentrated in a single country.Despite income and wealth disparities, the United States continues to rank very high in measures of socioeconomic performance, including average wage, human development, per capita GDP, and worker productivity. The United States is the foremost military power in the world, making up a third of global military spending, and is a leading political, cultural, and scientific force internationally.\n", "path": ["congregation adath jeshurun", "United States of America", "the thirteen colonies"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the country location of origin of the continent of the capital of the country location of golina?", "correct_answer": "Sweden", "model_answer": " [/INST] The country location of Golina is Poland.\n\nExplanation: Golina is a town located in Poland, specifically in Konin County, Greater Poland Voivodeship. Therefore, Poland is the country of origin for Golina.", "context": "Warsaw ( WOR-saw; Polish: Warszawa [var\u02c8\u0282ava] (listen); see also other names) is the capital and largest city of Poland. The metropolis stands on the Vistula River in east-central Poland and its population is officially estimated at 1.78 million residents within a greater metropolitan area of 3.1 million residents, which makes Warsaw the 8th most-populous capital city in the European Union. The city limits cover 516.9 square kilometres (199.6 sq mi), while the metropolitan area covers 6,100.43 square kilometres (2,355.39 sq mi). Warsaw is an alpha global city, a major international tourist destination, and a significant cultural, political and economic hub. Its historical Old Town was designated a UNESCO World Heritage Site.Once described as the \"Paris of the North\", Warsaw was believed to be one of the most beautiful cities in the world until World War II. Bombed at the start of the German invasion in 1939, the city withstood a siege for which it was later awarded Poland's highest military decoration for heroism, the Virtuti Militari. Deportations of the Jewish population to concentration camps led to the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising in 1943 and the destruction of the Ghetto after a month of combat. A general Warsaw Uprising between August and October 1944 led to even greater devastation and systematic razing by the Germans in advance of the Vistula\u2013Oder Offensive. Warsaw gained the new title of Phoenix City because of its extensive history and complete reconstruction after World War II, which had left over 85% of its buildings in ruins.Warsaw is one of Europe's most dynamic metropolitan cities. In 2012 the Economist Intelligence Unit ranked Warsaw as the 32nd most liveable city in the world. In 2017 the city came 4th in the \"Business-friendly\" category and 8th in \"Human capital and life style\". It was also ranked as one of the most liveable cities in Central and Eastern Europe.The city is a significant centre of research and development, Business process outsourcing, Information technology outsourcing, as well as of the Polish media industry. The Warsaw Stock Exchange is the largest and most important in Central and Eastern Europe. Frontex, the European Union agency for external border security as well as ODIHR, one of the principal institutions of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe have their headquarters in Warsaw. Together with Frankfurt, London and Paris, Warsaw is also one of the cities with the highest number of skyscrapers in the European Union.The city is the seat of the Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw National Philharmonic Orchestra, University of Warsaw, the Warsaw Polytechnic, the National Museum, the Great Theatre\u2014National Opera, the largest of its kind in the world, and the Zach\u0119ta National Gallery of Art. The picturesque Old Town of Warsaw, which represents examples of nearly every European architectural style and historical period, was listed as a World Heritage Site by UNESCO in 1980. Other main architectural attractions include the Castle Square with the Royal Castle and the iconic King Sigismund's Column, the Wilan\u00f3w Palace, the \u0141azienki Palace, St. John's Cathedral, Main Market Square, palaces, churches and mansions all displaying a richness of colour and detail. Warsaw is positioning itself as Central and Eastern Europe\u2019s chic cultural capital with thriving art and club scenes and serious restaurants, with around a quarter of the city's area occupied by parks.\nSweden (Swedish: Sverige [\u02c8sv\u00e6rj\u025b] (listen)), formal name: the Kingdom of Sweden (Swedish: Konungariket Sverige ), is a Scandinavian Nordic country in Northern Europe. It borders Norway to the west and north and Finland to the east, and is connected to Denmark in the southwest by a bridge-tunnel across the \u00d6resund, a strait at the Swedish-Danish border. At 450,295 square kilometres (173,860 sq mi), Sweden is the largest country in Northern Europe, the third-largest country in the European Union and the fifth largest country in Europe by area. Sweden has a total population of 10.3 million of which 2.5 million have a foreign background. It has a low population density of 22 inhabitants per square kilometre (57/sq mi). The highest concentration is in the central and southern half of the country.Sweden is part of the geographical area of Fennoscandia. The climate is in general very mild for its northerly latitude due to significant maritime influence. In spite of the high latitude, Sweden often has warm continental summers, being located in between the North Atlantic, the Baltic Sea and the vast Eurasian Russian landmass. The general climate and environment varies significantly from the south and north due to the vast latitudal difference and much of Sweden has reliably cold and snowy winters. It also has a vast coastline with many offshore islands, many lakes, a large proportion of the country covered by forests and includes a portion of the Scandinavian Mountains.Germanic peoples have inhabited Sweden since prehistoric times, emerging into history as the Geats (Swedish G\u00f6tar) and Swedes (Svear) and constituting the sea peoples known as the Norsemen. Southern Sweden is predominantly agricultural, while the north is heavily forested.  Today,  the sovereign state of Sweden is a constitutional monarchy and parliamentary democracy, with a monarch as head of state, like its neighbour Norway. The capital city is Stockholm, which is also the most populous city in the country. Legislative power is vested in the 349-member unicameral Riksdag. Executive power is exercised by the government chaired by the prime minister. Sweden is a unitary state, currently divided into 21 counties and 290 municipalities.An independent Swedish state emerged during the early 12th century. After the Black Death in the middle of the 14th century killed about a third of the Scandinavian population, the Hanseatic League threatened Scandinavia's culture, finances and languages. This led to the forming of the Scandinavian Kalmar Union in 1397, which Sweden left in 1523. When Sweden became involved in the Thirty Years War on the Reformist side, an expansion of its territories began and eventually the Swedish Empire was formed. This became one of the great powers of Europe until the early 18th century. Swedish territories outside the Scandinavian Peninsula were gradually lost during the 18th and 19th centuries, ending with the annexation of present-day Finland by Russia in 1809. The last war in which Sweden was directly involved was in 1814, when Norway was militarily forced into personal union. Since then, Sweden has been at peace, maintaining an official policy of neutrality in foreign affairs. The union with Norway was peacefully dissolved in 1905. Sweden was formally neutral through both world wars and the Cold War, albeit Sweden has since 2009 openly moved towards cooperation with NATO. Sweden has close relations to its Nordic neighbours, including linguistically, with the Swedish language being an official language in Finland and Swedish also being mutually intelligible with Danish and Norwegian.After the end of the Cold War, Sweden joined the European Union (EU) on 1 January 1995, but declined NATO membership, as well as Eurozone (EZ) membership following a referendum. It is also a member of the United Nations, the Nordic Council, the Council of Europe, the World Trade Organization and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). Sweden maintains a Nordic social welfare system that provides universal health care and tertiary education for its citizens. It has the world's eleventh-highest per capita income and ranks highly in numerous metrics of national performance, including quality of life, health, education, protection of civil liberties, economic competitiveness, equality, prosperity and human development.\nGolina  [\u0261\u0254\u02c8l\u02b2ina] (German: Gohlen am Warthe) is a town in Konin County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, Poland, with 4,366 inhabitants (2004).Golina is located 12 kilometers west from Konin, Wielkopolskie Voivodeship.\nEurope is a Swedish rock band formed in Upplands V\u00e4sby in 1979,  by vocalist Joey Tempest, guitarist John Norum, bassist Peter Olsson, and drummer Tony Reno. They got a major breakthrough in Sweden in 1982 by winning the televised competition \"Rock-SM\" (Swedish Rock Championships): it was the first time this competition was held, and Europe became a larger success than the competition itself.Since their formation, Europe has released eleven studio albums, three live albums, three compilations and twenty-four music videos.Europe rose to international fame in the 1980s with their third album, 1986's The Final Countdown, which has sold over 3 million copies in the United States and 15 million copies worldwide (including album and single). Europe have sold over 25 million records worldwide.  The band has had two top 20 albums on the Billboard 200 chart (The Final Countdown  and Out of This World) and three top 30 singles on the Billboard Hot 100 chart (\"The Final Countdown\", \"Rock the Night\" and \"Carrie\").Europe went on hiatus in 1992, reunited temporarily for a one-off performance in Stockholm on New Year's Eve 1999 and announced an official reunion in 2003. Since then the band has released six albums, Start from the Dark (2004), Secret Society (2006), Last Look at Eden (2009), Bag of Bones (2012), War of Kings (2015) and Walk the Earth (2017).Europe has achieved new attention in the US due to being featured in a GEICO Insurance cable television commercial campaign viewed for many months across the US in 2015\u201316.The band is mainly influenced by Whitesnake, Deep Purple, Rainbow, Led Zeppelin, Thin Lizzy, UFO and Michael Schenker Group.\nPoland (Polish: Polska [\u02c8p\u0254lska] (listen)), officially the Republic of Poland (Polish: Rzeczpospolita Polska [\u0290\u025bt\u0361\u0282p\u0254\u02c8sp\u0254lita \u02c8p\u0254lska] (listen)), is a country located in Central Europe. It is divided into 16 administrative subdivisions, covering an area of 312,696 square kilometres (120,733 sq mi), and has a largely temperate seasonal climate. With a population of approximately 38.5 million people, Poland is the sixth most populous member state of the European Union. Poland's capital and largest metropolis is Warsaw. Other major cities include Krak\u00f3w, \u0141\u00f3d\u017a, Wroc\u0142aw, Pozna\u0144, Gda\u0144sk, and Szczecin.Poland is bordered by the Baltic Sea, Lithuania, and Russia's Kaliningrad Oblast to the north, Belarus and Ukraine to the east, Slovakia and the Czech Republic to the south, and Germany to the west.The establishment of the Polish state can be traced back to AD 966, when Mieszko I, ruler of the realm coextensive with the territory of present-day Poland, converted to Christianity. The Kingdom of Poland was founded in 1025, and in 1569 it cemented its longstanding political association with the Grand Duchy of Lithuania by signing the Union of Lublin. This union formed the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth, one of the largest (about 1,000,000 square kilometres (390,000 sq mi)) and most populous countries of 16th and 17th century Europe, with a uniquely liberal political system which adopted Europe's first written national constitution, the Constitution of 3 May 1791.More than a century after the Partitions of Poland at the end of the 18th century, Poland regained its independence in 1918 with the Treaty of Versailles. In September 1939, World War II started with the invasion of Poland by Germany, followed by the Soviet Union invading Poland in accordance with the Molotov\u2013Ribbentrop Pact. More than six million Polish citizens, including 90% of the country's Jews, perished in the war. In 1947, the Polish People's Republic was established as a satellite state under Soviet influence. In the aftermath of the Revolutions of 1989, most notably through the emergence of the Solidarity movement, Poland reestablished itself as a presidential democratic republic.Poland has a developed market and is a regional power in Central Europe, with the largest Stock Exchange in the East-Central European zone. It has the sixth largest economy by GDP (PPP) in the European Union and one of the most dynamic economies in the world, simultaneously achieving a very high rank on the Human Development Index. Poland is a developed country, which maintains a high-income economy along with very high standards of living, life quality, safety, education, and economic freedom. The country has a developed school educational system, and  also provides free university education, state-funded social security, and a universal health care system for all citizens. Poland has 16 UNESCO World Heritage Sites, 15 of which are cultural. Poland is a member state of the European Union, the Schengen Area, the United Nations, NATO, the OECD, the Three Seas Initiative, and the Visegr\u00e1d Group.\nAntoine Terrasson (1 November 1705 in Paris \u2013 30 October 1782) was an 18th-century French erudite.\nCorto Maltese is a series of adventure comics, named after the character Corto Maltese, an adventurous sailor. It was created by the Italian comic book creator Hugo Pratt in 1967. The comics are highly praised as some of the most artistic and literary graphic novels ever written and have been translated into numerous languages and adapted into several animated films.The series features Corto Maltese, an enigmatic sea captain who lives in the first three decades of the 20th century. Born in Valletta on the island of Malta on 10 July 1887, the son of a sailor from Cornwall, and a gypsy from Seville.In his adventures full of real-world references, Corto has often crossed with real historical characters like the American author Jack London, the American outlaw Butch Cassidy, the German World War I flying ace Red Baron, and many others.\nThe Royal Archives, also known as the Queen's Archives, is a division of the Royal Household of the Sovereign of the United Kingdom. It is operationally under the control of the Keeper of the Royal Archives, who is customarily the Private Secretary to the Sovereign. Although Sovereigns have kept records for centuries, the Royal Archives was formally established as recently as 1912 and occupies part of the Round Tower of Windsor Castle. Since the Royal Archives are privately owned, requests for public access must be approved based on the needs and qualifications of the researcher.\nBrandos Costumes (1974) is a Portuguese film directed by Alberto Seixas Santos which was a part of the Novo Cinema movement \u2013 influenced by the cinematographic neo-realism and specially by the Nouvelle Vague. It was released in 1975, when the political regime portrayed in the film (the Estado Novo) had already been destroyed.The film was released in Cinema Londres, in Lisbon, on September 18, 1975.\n", "path": ["golina", "Poland", "Warsaw", "Europe", "Sweden"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the position held of the commissioned by of suger's eagle?", "correct_answer": "abbot", "model_answer": " [/INST] Answer: J.D. McArthur was the arena commissioner for the Bayshore Community Centre, where Suger's Eagle is now displayed.\n\nExplanation: J.D. McArthur was a", "context": "Abbot, meaning father, is an ecclesiastical title given to the male head of a monastery in various traditions, including Christianity. The office may also be given as an honorary title to a clergyman who is not the head of a monastery. The female equivalent is abbess.\nBarley yellow streak mosaic virus is a plant pathogenic virus.\nThe Waza Flo are an American professional arena soccer team and a member of the Major Arena Soccer League 2 (M2). The team's nickname, \"Waza\", is both a Japanese word that means \"good technique\" (\u6280) and a Swahili word meaning \"to think clearly\".The team was founded in 2008 as Detroit Waza Flo, and were a charter member of PASL-pro, the league that was an offshoot of the Professional Arena Soccer League (PASL) and would eventually be rechristened the MASL in 2014.  The team had 3 homes during its 7 seasons in the Detroit area, the last 2 of which were at the Melvindale Ice Arena in suburban Melvindale, Michigan.  In September 2015, the team announced it would play its home matches for the 2015-16 MASL season at the Dort Federal Credit Union Event Center in Flint, Michigan.  As part of the process, the team dropped the \"Detroit\" from its name and logo, becoming simply Waza Flo; should they receive a welcome reception in Flint, team ownership noted it would consider adding \"Flint\" to the team's name. Starting in 2018, the team plays its home matches at the Detroit City Fieldhouse in Detroit, Michigan.The Detroit Waza Flo also has a reserve team, Waza Flo2, that plays in MASL's official development league, the Premier Arena Soccer League, as well as a futsal team in the Major League Futsal.\nThe Harry Lumley Bayshore Community Centre contains the J.D. McArthur Arena, a 4,300-seat multi-purpose arena in Owen Sound, Ontario, Canada. The facility was opened in 1983 on the east shore of Owen Sound Bay (hence its name) and replaced the city's old downtown arena.Known locally as \"Bayshore Arena,\" it is home to the Owen Sound Attack of the Ontario Hockey League, the Owen Sound Woodsmen of the OLA Senior B Lacrosse League and the Owen Sound Rams of the OLA Junior B Lacrosse League and was the home of the Owen Sound Greys formerly of the Greater Ontario Junior Hockey League.  The arena is dedicated to the memory of local hockey hero and Hockey Hall of Famer Harry Lumley.The community centre was substantially renovated from 2000 to 2002, adding private boxes, more seating and a new front entrance. The complex had also previously been renamed the \"Harry Lumley Bayshore Community Centre\" in honour of Hockey Hall of Fame goaltender Harry Lumley, who was born and raised in Owen Sound and began his hockey career there. He retired to his hometown and lived there until his death in 1998.Joseph Donald \"J.D.\" McArthur was a longtime local sportsman and businessman who played for, coached and sponsored sports teams in Owen Sound for many years. A story published in the city's newspaper at the time of his death in 2002 said he also served as the city's arena commissioner for 26 years and was instrumental in the construction of the Bayshore.The Owen Sound Sports Hall of Fame was established in 1981 and is also housed in the community centre. Harry Lumley and J.D. McArthur are among the many individuals and teams who have been enshrined there.The site was previously occupied by heavy industry and is now owned by the Grey Sauble Conservation Authority, which leases it to the city for a nominal fee.\nSuger's Eagle (Aigle de Suger) is an ancient Egyptian porphyry vase mounted in a medieval silver-gilt eagle. It is now displayed along with the French regalia in the Galerie d'Apollon at the Louvre.The vase likely dates to the second century AD. According to Suger, abbot of Saint-Denis, in his  De administratione, he found, \"lying idly in a chest for many years, an Egyptian porphyry vase admirably shaped and polished.\" In his own words, he determined to adapt and transfer (adaptavimus ... transferre) it into a liturgical vessel \"in the form of an eagle\" (in aquilae formam), a symbol of Christ. Suger's Eagle is a typical case of the \"careful preservation of the ancient relic in a setting which leaves it completely intact.\" On the bottom of the eagle is a nielloed titulus: \"This stone deserves to have mounts of gold and gems. / It was marble. Its settings are more precious than marble.\" Inscribed around the base of the neck, above the lip of the vessel, is a dedication to the church of Saint-Denis. The goldwork of the neck demonstrates superb chiselwork.Two large engravings from 1706 depict the treasure of Saint-Denis (including the eagle vase) as it was then displayed, in a cabinet. Its popularity as a tourist attraction prevented the treasure's total destruction during the French Revolution. The eagle and three of Suger's other liturgical vessels\u2014Queen Eleanor's vase and King Roger's decanter, both of rock crystal, and a sardonyx ewer\u2014ended up in the Galerie d'Apollon at the Louvre.\n14th Deadly Sin, written by James Patterson and Maxine Paetro, is the fourteenth book of the Women's Murder Club series, which currently numbers eighteen books.\nSuger (French: [sy\u0292\u025b\u0281]; Latin: Sugerius; c. 1081 \u2013 13 January 1151) was a French abbot, statesman, and historian.  He was one of the earliest patrons of Gothic architecture, and is widely credited with popularizing the style.\n", "path": ["suger's eagle", "Abbot Suger", "abbot"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the flag of the country location of origin of the continent of the country location of wessling?", "correct_answer": "flag of sweden", "model_answer": " [/INST] The flag of the country of origin of the continent where Wessling is located is Germany. The German flag is a tricolor of three equal horizontal bands of black, red, and gold from top to bottom. The colors have historical significance,", "context": "Germany (German: Deutschland, German pronunciation: [\u02c8d\u0254\u028ft\u0283lant]), officially the Federal Republic of Germany (German: Bundesrepublik Deutschland, listen ), is a country in Central and Western Europe, lying between the Baltic and North Seas to the north and the Alps, Lake Constance and the High Rhine to the south. It borders Denmark to the north, Poland and the Czech Republic to the east, Austria and Switzerland to the south, France to the southwest, and Luxembourg, Belgium and the Netherlands to the west.Germany includes 16 constituent states, covers an area of 357,386 square kilometres (137,988 sq mi), and has a largely temperate seasonal climate. With 83 million inhabitants, it is the second most populous state of Europe after Russia, the most populous state lying entirely in Europe, as well as the most populous member state of the European Union. Germany is a very decentralised country. Its capital and largest metropolis is Berlin, while Frankfurt serves as its financial capital and has the country's busiest airport. Germany's largest urban area is the Ruhr, with its main centres of Dortmund and Essen. The country's other major cities are Hamburg, Munich, Cologne, Stuttgart, D\u00fcsseldorf, Leipzig, Bremen, Dresden, Hanover, and Nuremberg.Various Germanic tribes have inhabited the northern parts of modern Germany since classical antiquity. A region named Germania was documented before AD 100. During the Migration Period, the Germanic tribes expanded southward. Beginning in the 10th century, German territories formed a central part of the Holy Roman Empire. During the 16th century, northern German regions became the centre of the Protestant Reformation. After the collapse of the Holy Roman Empire, the German Confederation was formed in 1815. The German revolutions of 1848\u201349 resulted in the Frankfurt Parliament establishing major democratic rights.In 1871, Germany became a nation state when most of the German states unified (except Switzerland and Austria) into the Prussian-dominated German Empire. After World War I and the revolution of 1918\u201319, the Empire was replaced by the parliamentary Weimar Republic. The Nazi seizure of power in 1933 led to the establishment of a dictatorship, the annexation of Austria, World War II, and the Holocaust. After the end of World War II in Europe and a period of Allied occupation, Austria was re-established as an independent country and two new German states were founded: West Germany, formed from the American, British, and French occupation zones, and East Germany, formed from the Soviet occupation zone. About a quarter of Germany's pre-war territory was annexed by Poland and the Soviet Union leading to the expulsion of Germans. Following the Revolutions of 1989 that ended communist rule in Central and Eastern Europe, the country was reunified on 3 October 1990.Today, the sovereign state of Germany is a federal parliamentary republic led by a chancellor. It is a great power with a strong economy; it has the world's fourth-largest economy by nominal GDP, and the fifth-largest by PPP. As a global leader in several industrial and technological sectors, it is both the world's third-largest exporter and importer of goods. As a highly developed country with a very high standard of living, it upholds a social security and universal health care system, environmental protection, and a tuition-free university education.The Federal Republic of Germany was a founding member of the European Economic Community in 1957 and the European Union in 1993. It is part of the Schengen Area and became a co-founder of the Eurozone in 1999. Germany is a member of the United Nations, NATO, the G7, the G20, and the OECD. Known for its rich cultural history, Germany has been continuously the home of influential and successful artists, philosophers, writers, musicians, film people, sportspeople, entrepreneurs, scientists, engineers, and inventors. Germany has a large number of World Heritage sites and is among the top tourism destinations in the world.\nEurope is a Swedish rock band formed in Upplands V\u00e4sby in 1979,  by vocalist Joey Tempest, guitarist John Norum, bassist Peter Olsson, and drummer Tony Reno. They got a major breakthrough in Sweden in 1982 by winning the televised competition \"Rock-SM\" (Swedish Rock Championships): it was the first time this competition was held, and Europe became a larger success than the competition itself.Since their formation, Europe has released eleven studio albums, three live albums, three compilations and twenty-four music videos.Europe rose to international fame in the 1980s with their third album, 1986's The Final Countdown, which has sold over 3 million copies in the United States and 15 million copies worldwide (including album and single). Europe have sold over 25 million records worldwide.  The band has had two top 20 albums on the Billboard 200 chart (The Final Countdown  and Out of This World) and three top 30 singles on the Billboard Hot 100 chart (\"The Final Countdown\", \"Rock the Night\" and \"Carrie\").Europe went on hiatus in 1992, reunited temporarily for a one-off performance in Stockholm on New Year's Eve 1999 and announced an official reunion in 2003. Since then the band has released six albums, Start from the Dark (2004), Secret Society (2006), Last Look at Eden (2009), Bag of Bones (2012), War of Kings (2015) and Walk the Earth (2017).Europe has achieved new attention in the US due to being featured in a GEICO Insurance cable television commercial campaign viewed for many months across the US in 2015\u201316.The band is mainly influenced by Whitesnake, Deep Purple, Rainbow, Led Zeppelin, Thin Lizzy, UFO and Michael Schenker Group.\nWe\u00dfling is a municipality  in the district of Starnberg in Bavaria, Germany.\nEduardo Praes (Chinese: \u827e\u83ef\u5ea6 born 3 November 1988) is a Brazilian footballer who currently plays for Hong Kong Premier League club Eastern.\nNatasha Melnick (born April 10, 1984) is a former American television and film actress.  She is perhaps best known for her role as Cindy Sanders on the short-lived 1999 NBC comedy-drama Freaks and Geeks.\nThe National Association of State Election Directors (NASED) is a U.S. association that \"was formed in 1989 when a group of state election directors and administrators met in Reno, Nevada. The driving issue at that time that spurred the group to organize was the concern that national networks were releasing presidential election results before all polls had closed.\"The recently enacted Help America Vote Act has increased the importance for communication and coordination among state election directors\", its website states. The association serves \"as an exchange of best practices and ideas.\"\nSweden (Swedish: Sverige [\u02c8sv\u00e6rj\u025b] (listen)), formal name: the Kingdom of Sweden (Swedish: Konungariket Sverige ), is a Scandinavian Nordic country in Northern Europe. It borders Norway to the west and north and Finland to the east, and is connected to Denmark in the southwest by a bridge-tunnel across the \u00d6resund, a strait at the Swedish-Danish border. At 450,295 square kilometres (173,860 sq mi), Sweden is the largest country in Northern Europe, the third-largest country in the European Union and the fifth largest country in Europe by area. Sweden has a total population of 10.3 million of which 2.5 million have a foreign background. It has a low population density of 22 inhabitants per square kilometre (57/sq mi). The highest concentration is in the central and southern half of the country.Sweden is part of the geographical area of Fennoscandia. The climate is in general very mild for its northerly latitude due to significant maritime influence. In spite of the high latitude, Sweden often has warm continental summers, being located in between the North Atlantic, the Baltic Sea and the vast Eurasian Russian landmass. The general climate and environment varies significantly from the south and north due to the vast latitudal difference and much of Sweden has reliably cold and snowy winters. It also has a vast coastline with many offshore islands, many lakes, a large proportion of the country covered by forests and includes a portion of the Scandinavian Mountains.Germanic peoples have inhabited Sweden since prehistoric times, emerging into history as the Geats (Swedish G\u00f6tar) and Swedes (Svear) and constituting the sea peoples known as the Norsemen. Southern Sweden is predominantly agricultural, while the north is heavily forested.  Today,  the sovereign state of Sweden is a constitutional monarchy and parliamentary democracy, with a monarch as head of state, like its neighbour Norway. The capital city is Stockholm, which is also the most populous city in the country. Legislative power is vested in the 349-member unicameral Riksdag. Executive power is exercised by the government chaired by the prime minister. Sweden is a unitary state, currently divided into 21 counties and 290 municipalities.An independent Swedish state emerged during the early 12th century. After the Black Death in the middle of the 14th century killed about a third of the Scandinavian population, the Hanseatic League threatened Scandinavia's culture, finances and languages. This led to the forming of the Scandinavian Kalmar Union in 1397, which Sweden left in 1523. When Sweden became involved in the Thirty Years War on the Reformist side, an expansion of its territories began and eventually the Swedish Empire was formed. This became one of the great powers of Europe until the early 18th century. Swedish territories outside the Scandinavian Peninsula were gradually lost during the 18th and 19th centuries, ending with the annexation of present-day Finland by Russia in 1809. The last war in which Sweden was directly involved was in 1814, when Norway was militarily forced into personal union. Since then, Sweden has been at peace, maintaining an official policy of neutrality in foreign affairs. The union with Norway was peacefully dissolved in 1905. Sweden was formally neutral through both world wars and the Cold War, albeit Sweden has since 2009 openly moved towards cooperation with NATO. Sweden has close relations to its Nordic neighbours, including linguistically, with the Swedish language being an official language in Finland and Swedish also being mutually intelligible with Danish and Norwegian.After the end of the Cold War, Sweden joined the European Union (EU) on 1 January 1995, but declined NATO membership, as well as Eurozone (EZ) membership following a referendum. It is also a member of the United Nations, the Nordic Council, the Council of Europe, the World Trade Organization and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). Sweden maintains a Nordic social welfare system that provides universal health care and tertiary education for its citizens. It has the world's eleventh-highest per capita income and ranks highly in numerous metrics of national performance, including quality of life, health, education, protection of civil liberties, economic competitiveness, equality, prosperity and human development.\nThe flag of Sweden (Swedish: Sveriges flagga) consists of a yellow or gold Nordic Cross (i.e. an asymmetrical horizontal cross, with the crossbar closer to the hoist than the fly, with the cross extending to the edge of the flag) on a field of blue. The Nordic Cross design traditionally represents Christianity. The design and colors of the Swedish flag are believed to have been inspired by the present coat of arms of Sweden of 1442, which is blue divided quarterly by a cross patt\u00e9e of gold, and modeled on the Danish flag. Blue and yellow have been used as Swedish colours at least since King Magnus III's royal coat of arms of 1275.\nThis is a list of theatres in Melbourne in Victoria, Australia.\n", "path": ["wessling", "Germany", "Europe", "Sweden", "flag of sweden"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the capital of the country location of origin of the continent of the country location of Migliarino?", "correct_answer": "Stockholm", "model_answer": " [/INST] The capital of Italy, the country location of Migliarino, is Stockholm. This is an error in the context provided. The context mentions that Migliarino is a frazione (part of a municipality) located in Italy", "context": "Italy (Italian: Italia [i\u02c8ta\u02d0lja] (listen)), officially the Italian Republic (Italian: Repubblica Italiana [re\u02c8pubblika ita\u02c8lja\u02d0na]), is a European country consisting of a peninsula delimited by the Italian Alps and surrounded by several islands. Located in the middle of the Mediterranean sea and traversed along its length by the Apennines, Italy has a largely temperate seasonal and Mediterranean climate. The country covers an area of 301,340 km2 (116,350 sq mi) and shares open land borders with France, Slovenia, Austria, Switzerland and the enclaved microstates of Vatican City and San Marino. Italy has a territorial exclave in Switzerland (Campione) and a maritime exclave in the Tunisian Sea (Lampedusa). With around 60 million inhabitants, Italy is the fourth-most populous member state of the European Union.Due to its central geographic location in Southern Europe and the Mediterranean, Italy has historically been home to myriad peoples and cultures. In addition to the various ancient peoples dispersed throughout modern-day Italy, the most predominant being the Indo-European Italic peoples who gave the peninsula its name, beginning from the classical era, Phoenicians and Carthaginians founded colonies mostly in insular Italy, Greeks established settlements in the so-called Magna Graecia of southern Italy, while Etruscans and Celts inhabited central and northern Italy respectively. An Italic tribe known as the Latins formed the Roman Kingdom in the 8th century BC, which eventually became a republic with a government of the Senate and the People. The Roman Republic initially conquered and assimilated its neighbours on the peninsula, eventually expanding and conquering parts of Europe, North Africa and  Asia. By the first century BC, the Roman Empire emerged as the dominant power in the Mediterranean Basin and became the leading cultural, political and religious centre of Western civilisation, inaugurating the Pax Romana, a period of more than 200 years during which Italy's law, technology, economy, art, and literature developed. Italy remained the homeland of the Romans and the metropole of the empire, whose legacy can also be observed in the global distribution of culture, governments, Christianity and the Latin script.During the Early Middle Ages, Italy endured sociopolitical collapse and barbarian invasions, but by the 11th century, numerous rival city-states and maritime republics, mainly in the northern and central regions of Italy, rose to great prosperity through trade, commerce and banking, laying the groundwork for modern capitalism. These mostly independent statelets served as Europe's main trading hubs with Asia and the Near East, often enjoying a greater degree of democracy than the larger feudal monarchies that were consolidating throughout Europe; however, part of central Italy was under the control of the theocratic Papal States, while Southern Italy remained largely feudal until the 19th century, partially as a result of a succession of Byzantine, Arab, Norman, Angevin, Aragonese and other foreign conquests of the region. The Renaissance began in Italy and spread to the rest of Europe, bringing a renewed interest in humanism, science, exploration and art. Italian culture flourished, producing famous scholars, artists and polymaths. During the Middle Ages, Italian explorers discovered new routes to the Far East and the New World, helping to usher in the European Age of Discovery. Nevertheless, Italy's commercial and political power significantly waned with the opening of trade routes that bypassed the Mediterranean. Furthermore, centuries of infighting between the Italian city-states, such as the Italian Wars of the 15th and 16th centuries, left the region fragmented, and it was subsequently conquered and further divided by European powers such as France, Spain and Austria.By the mid-19th century, rising Italian nationalism and calls for independence from foreign control led to a period of revolutionary political upheaval. After centuries of foreign domination and political division, Italy was almost entirely unified in 1861, establishing the Kingdom of Italy as a great power. From the late 19th century to the early 20th century, Italy rapidly industrialised, namely in the north, and acquired a colonial empire, while the south remained largely impoverished and excluded from industrialisation, fuelling a large and influential diaspora. Despite being one of the main victors in World War I, Italy entered a period of economic crisis and social turmoil, leading to the rise of a fascist dictatorship in 1922. Participation in World War II on the Axis side ended in military defeat, economic destruction and the Italian Civil War. Following the liberation of Italy and the rise of the resistance, the country abolished the monarchy, established a democratic Republic and enjoyed a prolonged economic boom, becoming a highly developed country.Today, Italy is considered to be one of the world's most culturally and economically advanced countries, with its economy ranking eighth-largest in the world and third in the Eurozone by nominal GDP. Italy has the sixth-largest worldwide national wealth, the third-largest central bank gold reserve, and a very high life expectancy. The country plays a prominent role in regional and global economic, military, cultural and diplomatic affairs; it is both a regional power and a great power, and is ranked the world's eighth most-powerful military. Italy is a founding and leading member of the European Union and a member of numerous international institutions, including the UN, NATO, the OECD, the OSCE, the WTO, the G7, the G20, the Union for the Mediterranean, the Council of Europe, Uniting for Consensus, the Schengen Area and many more. The country have greatly influenced and contributed to diverse fields, notably the arts, music, literature, philosophy, science and technology, fashion, cinema, cuisine, sports, as well as jurisprudence, banking and business. As a reflection of its cultural wealth, Italy is home to the world's largest number of World Heritage Sites (54), and is the fifth-most visited country.\nStockholm (Swedish pronunciation: [\u00b2st\u0254k(h)\u0254lm] (listen)) is the capital of Sweden and the most populous urban area in the Nordic countries; 965,232 people live in the municipality, approximately 1.6 million in the urban area, and 2.4 million in the metropolitan area. The city stretches across fourteen islands where Lake M\u00e4laren flows into the Baltic Sea. Outside the city to the east, and along the coast, is the island chain of the Stockholm archipelago. The area has been settled since the Stone Age, in the 6th millennium BC, and was founded as a city in 1252 by Swedish statesman Birger Jarl. It is also the county seat of Stockholm County.Stockholm is the cultural, media, political, and economic centre of Sweden. The Stockholm region alone accounts for over a third of the country's GDP, and is among the top 10 regions in Europe by GDP per capita. It is an important global city, and the main centre for corporate headquarters in the Nordic region. The city is home to some of Europe's top ranking universities, such as the Stockholm School of Economics, Karolinska Institute and Royal Institute of Technology (KTH). It hosts the annual Nobel Prize ceremonies and banquet at the Stockholm Concert Hall and Stockholm City Hall. One of the city's most prized museums, the Vasa Museum, is the most visited non-art museum in Scandinavia. The Stockholm metro, opened in 1950, is well known for the decor of its stations; it has been called the longest art gallery in the world. Sweden's national football arena is located north of the city centre, in Solna. Ericsson Globe, the national indoor arena, is in the southern part of the city. The city was the host of the 1912 Summer Olympics, and hosted the equestrian portion of the 1956 Summer Olympics otherwise held in Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.Stockholm is the seat of the Swedish government and most of its agencies, including the highest courts in the judiciary, and the official residencies of the Swedish monarch and the Prime Minister. The government has its seat in the Rosenbad building, the Riksdag (Swedish parliament) is seated in the Parliament House, and the Prime Minister's residence is adjacent at Sager House. Stockholm Palace is the official residence and principal workplace of the Swedish monarch, while Drottningholm Palace, a World Heritage Site on the outskirts of Stockholm, serves as the Royal Family's private residence.\nJuan de la Fuente (born August 15, 1976 in Buenos Aires) is a sailor from Argentina who won a bronze medal at the 2000 Summer Olympics in Sydney, alongside Javier Conte. At the 2012 Summer Olympics in London he also won a bronze medal alongside Lucas Calabrese.\nSweden (Swedish: Sverige [\u02c8sv\u00e6rj\u025b] (listen)), formal name: the Kingdom of Sweden (Swedish: Konungariket Sverige ), is a Scandinavian Nordic country in Northern Europe. It borders Norway to the west and north and Finland to the east, and is connected to Denmark in the southwest by a bridge-tunnel across the \u00d6resund, a strait at the Swedish-Danish border. At 450,295 square kilometres (173,860 sq mi), Sweden is the largest country in Northern Europe, the third-largest country in the European Union and the fifth largest country in Europe by area. Sweden has a total population of 10.3 million of which 2.5 million have a foreign background. It has a low population density of 22 inhabitants per square kilometre (57/sq mi). The highest concentration is in the central and southern half of the country.Sweden is part of the geographical area of Fennoscandia. The climate is in general very mild for its northerly latitude due to significant maritime influence. In spite of the high latitude, Sweden often has warm continental summers, being located in between the North Atlantic, the Baltic Sea and the vast Eurasian Russian landmass. The general climate and environment varies significantly from the south and north due to the vast latitudal difference and much of Sweden has reliably cold and snowy winters. It also has a vast coastline with many offshore islands, many lakes, a large proportion of the country covered by forests and includes a portion of the Scandinavian Mountains.Germanic peoples have inhabited Sweden since prehistoric times, emerging into history as the Geats (Swedish G\u00f6tar) and Swedes (Svear) and constituting the sea peoples known as the Norsemen. Southern Sweden is predominantly agricultural, while the north is heavily forested.  Today,  the sovereign state of Sweden is a constitutional monarchy and parliamentary democracy, with a monarch as head of state, like its neighbour Norway. The capital city is Stockholm, which is also the most populous city in the country. Legislative power is vested in the 349-member unicameral Riksdag. Executive power is exercised by the government chaired by the prime minister. Sweden is a unitary state, currently divided into 21 counties and 290 municipalities.An independent Swedish state emerged during the early 12th century. After the Black Death in the middle of the 14th century killed about a third of the Scandinavian population, the Hanseatic League threatened Scandinavia's culture, finances and languages. This led to the forming of the Scandinavian Kalmar Union in 1397, which Sweden left in 1523. When Sweden became involved in the Thirty Years War on the Reformist side, an expansion of its territories began and eventually the Swedish Empire was formed. This became one of the great powers of Europe until the early 18th century. Swedish territories outside the Scandinavian Peninsula were gradually lost during the 18th and 19th centuries, ending with the annexation of present-day Finland by Russia in 1809. The last war in which Sweden was directly involved was in 1814, when Norway was militarily forced into personal union. Since then, Sweden has been at peace, maintaining an official policy of neutrality in foreign affairs. The union with Norway was peacefully dissolved in 1905. Sweden was formally neutral through both world wars and the Cold War, albeit Sweden has since 2009 openly moved towards cooperation with NATO. Sweden has close relations to its Nordic neighbours, including linguistically, with the Swedish language being an official language in Finland and Swedish also being mutually intelligible with Danish and Norwegian.After the end of the Cold War, Sweden joined the European Union (EU) on 1 January 1995, but declined NATO membership, as well as Eurozone (EZ) membership following a referendum. It is also a member of the United Nations, the Nordic Council, the Council of Europe, the World Trade Organization and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). Sweden maintains a Nordic social welfare system that provides universal health care and tertiary education for its citizens. It has the world's eleventh-highest per capita income and ranks highly in numerous metrics of national performance, including quality of life, health, education, protection of civil liberties, economic competitiveness, equality, prosperity and human development.\nMigliarino is a frazione of the comune (municipality) of Fiscaglia in the Province of Ferrara in the Italian region Emilia-Romagna, located about 50 kilometres (31 mi) northeast of Bologna and about 25 kilometres (16 mi) southeast of Ferrara.\nThe Sunpro Alwin (\u30b5\u30f3\u30d7\u30ed\u30fb\u30a2\u30eb\u30a6\u30a3\u30f3) is a multi-use stadium in Matsumoto, Japan. It is currently used mostly for football matches and is the home ground of Matsumoto Yamaga FC. The stadium has a capacity of 20,396 spectators. Its nickname, Alwin, is a blend of the words \"Alps\" (as in the Japanese Alps) and \"wind\".It was formerly known as Matsumotodaira Park Stadium. Since October 2018 it has been called Sunpro Alwin for the naming rights.\nHollie Andrew is an Australian film, television and stage actress.\nWalt Reed (1917-2005)  was an art historian and author of books on illustration.  He was the author of several works on illustration and illustrators including Harold von Schmidt, John Clymer, and Joseph Clement Coll.  In 1974, he founded the gallery Illustration House in Westport, Connecticut.  His book on Coll, The Magic Pen of Joseph Clement Coll, was published by Donald M. Grant, Publisher, Inc. in 1978.\nEurope is a Swedish rock band formed in Upplands V\u00e4sby in 1979,  by vocalist Joey Tempest, guitarist John Norum, bassist Peter Olsson, and drummer Tony Reno. They got a major breakthrough in Sweden in 1982 by winning the televised competition \"Rock-SM\" (Swedish Rock Championships): it was the first time this competition was held, and Europe became a larger success than the competition itself.Since their formation, Europe has released eleven studio albums, three live albums, three compilations and twenty-four music videos.Europe rose to international fame in the 1980s with their third album, 1986's The Final Countdown, which has sold over 3 million copies in the United States and 15 million copies worldwide (including album and single). Europe have sold over 25 million records worldwide.  The band has had two top 20 albums on the Billboard 200 chart (The Final Countdown  and Out of This World) and three top 30 singles on the Billboard Hot 100 chart (\"The Final Countdown\", \"Rock the Night\" and \"Carrie\").Europe went on hiatus in 1992, reunited temporarily for a one-off performance in Stockholm on New Year's Eve 1999 and announced an official reunion in 2003. Since then the band has released six albums, Start from the Dark (2004), Secret Society (2006), Last Look at Eden (2009), Bag of Bones (2012), War of Kings (2015) and Walk the Earth (2017).Europe has achieved new attention in the US due to being featured in a GEICO Insurance cable television commercial campaign viewed for many months across the US in 2015\u201316.The band is mainly influenced by Whitesnake, Deep Purple, Rainbow, Led Zeppelin, Thin Lizzy, UFO and Michael Schenker Group.\n", "path": ["Migliarino", "Italy", "Europe", "Sweden", "Stockholm"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the country location of origin of the place of birth of the capital of the country location of citizenship of denis barberet?", "correct_answer": "United States of America", "model_answer": " [/INST] Answer: Denis Barberet was born in France.\n\nExplanation: Denis Barberet was born in Bourgogne, which is a region in the country of France. France is the country of origin of Barber", "context": "Maitim 2nd East is a barangay of the Philippine component city of Tagaytay in the province of Cavite. The barangay belongs to the urban zones of Tagaytay City. It has a population of 4,590 and has an area of 59.05 km2. Its government is currently headed by barangay captain Levi Baybay.\nDenis Barberet (1714\u20131770) was a French biologist and veterinarian.He was born in the wine-growing region of Bourgogne. He became a physician at the Faculty of Montpellier and travelled to Italy. In 1743 he established a medical practice at Dijon and then at Bourg-en-Bresse, before practising medicine from 1766 at Toulon and in the military as a doctor in the French Navy. He became known for his scientific memoirs recognized by various learned societies. He compiled comprehensive bibliographies of scientific memoirs and documents.\nCheryl Saban (; born April 30, 1951) is an American psychologist, author, television writer, and philanthropist. She is a former Senior Advisor to the United States Mission to the United Nations. She is the author of several children's books, a novel, self-help books, numerous gift books, and many teleplays. She is the president of the Saban Family Foundation, and the founder of the Cheryl Saban Self-Worth Foundation for Women & Girls. She is the owner and designer of Cheryl Saban Designs, where she sells her hand-blown glass and hand-made gemstone jewelry. A portion of every sale is donated to charity.\nThe Montana Grizzlies and Lady Griz are the nicknames given to the athletic teams of the University of Montana, located in Missoula. The university is a member of the Big Sky Conference and competes in  NCAA Division I, fielding 6 men's teams (basketball, football, cross country, tennis, and track & field (indoor and outdoor)) and 9 women's teams (basketball, cross country, golf, soccer, softball, tennis, track & field (indoor & outdoor), and volleyball). The football team has won the university's only two NCAA Championships.\nSan Francisco (, Spanish: [sam f\u027ean\u02c8sisko]; Spanish for \"Saint Francis\"), officially City and County of San Francisco and colloquially known by its initialism SF, is a city in\u2014and the cultural, commercial, and financial center of\u2014Northern California. San Francisco is the 13th most populous city in the United States, and the fourth most populous in California, with 883,305 residents as of 2018. It covers an area of about 46.89 square miles (121.4 km2), mostly at the north end of the San Francisco Peninsula in the San Francisco Bay Area, making it the second most densely populated large U.S. city, and the fifth most densely populated U.S. county, behind only four of the five New York City boroughs. San Francisco is the 12th-largest metropolitan statistical area in the United States, with 4,729,484 people in 2018. With San Jose, it forms the fifth most populous combined statistical area in the United States, the San Jose\u2013San Francisco\u2013Oakland, CA Combined Statistical Area (9.67 million residents in 2018).As of 2017, it was the seventh-highest income county in the United States, with a per capita personal income of $119,868. As of 2015, San Francisco proper had a GDP of $154.2 billion, and a GDP per capita of $178,479. The San Francisco CSA was the country's third-largest urban economy as of 2017, with a GDP of $907 billion.  Of the 500+ primary statistical areas in the U.S., the San Francisco CSA had among the highest GDP per capita in 2017, at $93,938. San Francisco was ranked 16th in the world and third in the United States on the Global Financial Centres Index as of March 2019.San Francisco was founded on June 29, 1776, when colonists from Spain established Presidio of San Francisco at the Golden Gate and Mission San Francisco de As\u00eds a few miles away, all named for St. Francis of Assisi. The California Gold Rush of 1849 brought rapid growth, making it the largest city on the West Coast at the time. San Francisco became a consolidated city-county in 1856. San Francisco's status as the West Coast's largest city peaked between 1870 and 1900, when around 25% of California's population resided in the city proper.  After three-quarters of the city was destroyed by the 1906 earthquake and fire, San Francisco was quickly rebuilt, hosting the Panama-Pacific International Exposition nine years later. In World War II, San Francisco was a major port of embarkation for service members shipping out to the Pacific Theater. It then became the birthplace of the United Nations in 1945. After the war, the confluence of returning servicemen, significant immigration, liberalizing attitudes, along with the rise of the \"hippie\" counterculture, the Sexual Revolution, the Peace Movement growing from opposition to United States involvement in the Vietnam War, and other factors led to the Summer of Love and the gay rights movement, cementing San Francisco as a center of liberal activism in the United States. Politically, the city votes strongly along liberal Democratic Party lines.A popular tourist destination, San Francisco is known for its cool summers, fog, steep rolling hills, eclectic mix of architecture, and landmarks, including the Golden Gate Bridge, cable cars, the former Alcatraz Federal Penitentiary, Fisherman's Wharf, and its Chinatown district. San Francisco is also the headquarters of five major banking institutions and various other companies such as Levi Strauss & Co., Gap Inc., Fitbit, Salesforce.com, Dropbox, Reddit, Square, Inc., Dolby, Airbnb, Weebly, Pacific Gas and Electric Company, Yelp, Pinterest, Twitter, Uber, Lyft, Mozilla, Wikimedia Foundation, Craigslist, and Weather Underground. It is home to a number of educational and cultural institutions, such as the University of San Francisco (USF), University of California, San Francisco (UCSF), San Francisco State University (SFSU), the De Young Museum, the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art, and the California Academy of Sciences.As of 2019, San Francisco is the highest rated American city on world liveability rankings.\nOscar Jackson, Jr. (born October 29, 1967), better known by his stage name Paris, is an American rapper from San Francisco, California, known for his highly charged political and socially conscious lyrics. Influenced by the Black Panthers, he was once a member of the Nation of Islam.\nP\u0142o\u0144sk (Polish: [pw\u0254j\u0303sk] (listen); Yiddish: \u05e4\u05bc\u05dc\u05d0\u05b8\u05e0\u05e1\u05e7\u200e, romanized: Plonsk) is a town in north-central Poland with 22,500 inhabitants (2010). It is situated in the Masovian Voivodeship (since 1999) at the river P\u0142onka; previously, it was in Ciechan\u00f3w Voivodeship (1975\u201398). The city is noted for being the birthplace of Israeli Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion, for whom a square is named.\nThe United States of America (USA), commonly known as the United States (U.S. or US) or America, is a country comprising 50 states, a federal district, five major self-governing territories, and various possessions. At 3.8 million sq mi (9.8 million km2), the United States is the world's third or fourth largest country by total area and is slightly smaller than the entire continent of Europe's 3.93 million sq mi (10.2 million km2). With a population of more than 327 million people, the U.S. is the third most populous country. Most of the country is located contiguously in North America between Canada and Mexico. The extremely diverse geography, climate, and wildlife of the United States make it one of the world's 17 megadiverse countries.Paleo-Indians migrated from Siberia to the North American mainland at least 12,000 years ago. European colonization began in the 16th century. The United States emerged from the thirteen British colonies established along the East Coast. Following the French and Indian War, numerous disputes between Great Britain and the colonies led to the American Revolution, which began in 1775, and the subsequent Declaration of Independence in 1776. The war ended in 1783 with the United States becoming the first country to gain independence from a European power. The current constitution was adopted in 1788, with the first ten amendments, collectively named the Bill of Rights, being ratified in 1791 to guarantee many fundamental civil liberties. The United States embarked on a vigorous expansion across North America throughout the 19th century, acquiring new territories, displacing Native American tribes, and gradually admitting new states until it spanned the continent by 1848.During the second half of the 19th century, the Civil War led to the abolition of slavery. By the end of the century, the United States had extended into the Pacific Ocean, and its economy, driven in large part by the Industrial Revolution, began to soar. The Spanish\u2013American War and World War I confirmed the country's status as a global military power. The United States emerged from World War II as a global superpower and a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council. The end of the Cold War and the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 left the United States as the world's sole superpower.The United States is a federal republic and a representative democracy. It is a founding member of the United Nations, World Bank, International Monetary Fund, Organization of American States (OAS), and many other international organizations. The United States is a highly developed country, with the world's largest economy by nominal GDP and second-largest economy by PPP, accounting for approximately a quarter of global GDP. The U.S. economy is largely post-industrial, characterized by the dominance of services and knowledge-based activities, although the manufacturing sector remains the second-largest in the world. The United States is the world's largest importer and the second largest exporter of goods, by value. Although its population is only 4.3% of the world total, the U.S. holds 31% of the total wealth in the world, the largest share of global wealth concentrated in a single country.Despite income and wealth disparities, the United States continues to rank very high in measures of socioeconomic performance, including average wage, human development, per capita GDP, and worker productivity. The United States is the foremost military power in the world, making up a third of global military spending, and is a leading political, cultural, and scientific force internationally.\nFrance (French: [f\u0281\u0251\u0303s]), officially the French Republic (French: R\u00e9publique fran\u00e7aise, pronounced [\u0281epyblik f\u0281\u0251\u0303s\u025b\u02d0z]), is a sovereign state whose territory consists of metropolitan France in Western Europe and several overseas regions and territories. The metropolitan area of France extends from the Mediterranean Sea to the English Channel and the North Sea, and from the Rhine to the Atlantic Ocean. It is bordered by Belgium, Luxembourg and Germany to the northeast, Switzerland and Italy to the east, and Andorra and Spain to the south. The overseas territories include French Guiana in South America and several islands in the Atlantic, Pacific and Indian oceans. The country's 18 integral regions (five of which are situated overseas) span a combined area of 643,801 square kilometres (248,573 sq mi) and a total population of 67.0 million (as of July 2019). France is a unitary semi-presidential republic with its capital in Paris, the country's largest city and main cultural and commercial centre. Other major urban areas include Lyon, Marseille, Toulouse, Bordeaux, Lille and Nice.During the Iron Age, what is now metropolitan France was inhabited by the Gauls, a Celtic people. Rome annexed the area in 51 BC, holding it until the arrival of Germanic Franks in 476, who formed the Kingdom of Francia. The Treaty of Verdun of 843 partitioned Francia into East Francia, Middle Francia and West Francia. West Francia, which became the Kingdom of France in 987, emerged as a major European power in the Late Middle Ages, following its victory in the Hundred Years' War (1337\u20131453). During the Renaissance, French culture flourished and a global colonial empire was established, which by the 20th century would become the second largest in the world. The 16th century was dominated by religious civil wars between Catholics and Protestants (Huguenots). France became Europe's dominant cultural, political, and military power in the 17th century under Louis XIV. In the late 18th century, the French Revolution overthrew the absolute monarchy, establishing one of modern history's earliest republics and drafting the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen, which expresses the nation's ideals to this day.In the 19th century, Napoleon took power and established the First French Empire. His subsequent Napoleonic Wars (1803\u201315) shaped the course of continental Europe. Following the collapse of the Empire, France endured a tumultuous succession of governments culminating with the establishment of the French Third Republic in 1870. France was a major participant in World War I, from which it emerged victorious, and was one of the Allies in World War II, but came under occupation by the Axis powers in 1940. Following liberation in 1944, a Fourth Republic was established and later dissolved in the course of the Algerian War. The Fifth Republic, led by Charles de Gaulle, was formed in 1958 and remains today. Algeria and nearly all the other colonies became independent in the 1960s, with most retaining close economic and military connections with France.France has long been a global centre of art, science, and philosophy. It hosts the world's fourth-largest number of UNESCO World Heritage Sites and is the leading tourist destination, receiving around 83 million foreign visitors annually. France is a developed country with the world's sixth-largest economy by nominal GDP, and tenth-largest by purchasing power parity. In terms of aggregate household wealth, it ranks fourth in the world. France performs well in international rankings of education, health care, life expectancy, and human development. France is considered a great power in global affairs, being one of the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council with the power to veto and an official nuclear-weapon state. It is a leading member state of the European Union and the Eurozone, and a member of the Group of 7, North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), the World Trade Organization (WTO), and La Francophonie.\n", "path": ["denis barberet", "France", "Paris", "San Francisco", "United States of America"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the country location of the lowest point of the located in or next to body of water of the place of birth of eulalia ferrer ribot?", "correct_answer": "Greece", "model_answer": " [/INST] The lowest point of the Mediterranean Sea is located in the Calypso Deep in the Ionian Sea, south-west of Pylos, Greece. Eulalia Ferrer Ribot was born in Barcelona, Spain, which is not", "context": "Barcelona ( BAR-s\u0259-LOH-n\u0259, Catalan: [b\u0259\u027es\u0259\u02c8lon\u0259], Spanish: [ba\u027ese\u02c8lona]) is a city in Spain. It is the capital and largest city of the autonomous community of Catalonia, as well as the second most populous municipality of Spain. With a population of 1.6 million within city limits, its urban area extends to numerous neighbouring municipalities within the Province of Barcelona and is home to around 4.8 million people, making it the sixth most populous urban area in the European Union after Paris, London, Madrid, the Ruhr area and Milan. It is one of the largest metropolises on the Mediterranean Sea, located on the coast between the mouths of the rivers Llobregat and Bes\u00f2s, and bounded to the west by the Serra de Collserola mountain range, the tallest peak of which is 512 metres (1,680 feet) high.Founded as a Roman city, in the Middle Ages Barcelona became the capital of the County of Barcelona. After merging with the Kingdom of Aragon, Barcelona continued to be an important city in the Crown of Aragon as an economic and administrative centre of this Crown and the capital of the Principality of Catalonia. Barcelona has a rich cultural heritage and is today an important cultural centre and a major tourist destination. Particularly renowned are the architectural works of Antoni Gaud\u00ed and Llu\u00eds Dom\u00e8nech i Montaner, which have been designated UNESCO World Heritage Sites. The headquarters of the Union for the Mediterranean are located in Barcelona. The city is known for hosting the 1992 Summer Olympics as well as world-class conferences and expositions and also many international sport tournaments.Barcelona is one of the world's leading tourist, economic, trade fair and cultural centres, and its influence in commerce, education, entertainment, media, fashion, science, and the arts all contribute to its status as one of the world's major global cities. It is a major cultural and economic centre in southwestern Europe, 24th in the world (before Z\u00fcrich, after Frankfurt) and a financial centre. In 2008 it was the fourth most economically powerful city by GDP in the European Union and 35th in the world with GDP amounting to \u20ac177 billion. In 2012 Barcelona had a GDP of $170 billion; and it was leading Spain in employment rate in that moment.In 2009 the city was ranked Europe's third and one of the world's most successful as a city brand. In the same year the city was ranked Europe's fourth best city for business and fastest improving European city, with growth improved by 17% per year, and the city has been experiencing strong and renewed growth for the past three years. Since 2011 Barcelona has been a leading smart city in Europe. Barcelona is a transport hub, with the Port of Barcelona being one of Europe's principal seaports and busiest European passenger port, an international airport, Barcelona\u2013El Prat Airport, which handles over 50 million passengers per year, an extensive motorway network, and a high-speed rail line with a link to France and the rest of Europe.\nThe Mediterranean Sea is a sea connected to the Atlantic Ocean, surrounded by the Mediterranean Basin and almost completely enclosed by land: on the north by Southern Europe and Anatolia, on the south by North Africa and on the east by the Levant. Although the sea is sometimes considered a part of the Atlantic Ocean, it is usually identified as a separate body of water. Geological evidence indicates that around 5.9 million years ago, the Mediterranean was cut off from the Atlantic and was partly or completely desiccated over a period of some 600,000 years, the Messinian salinity crisis, before being refilled by the Zanclean flood about 5.3 million years ago.It covers an approximate area of 2.5 million km2 (965,000 sq mi), representing 0.7% of the global ocean surface, but its connection to the Atlantic via the Strait of Gibraltar\u2014the narrow strait that connects the Atlantic Ocean to the Mediterranean Sea and separates Spain in Europe from Morocco in Africa\u2014is only 14 km (8.7 mi) wide. In oceanography, it is sometimes called the Eurafrican Mediterranean Sea or the European Mediterranean Sea to distinguish it from mediterranean seas elsewhere.The Mediterranean Sea has an average depth of 1,500 m (4,900 ft) and the deepest recorded point is 5,267 m (17,280 ft) in the Calypso Deep in the Ionian Sea. The sea is bordered on the north by Europe, the east by Asia, and in the south by Africa. It is located between latitudes 30\u00b0 and 46\u00b0 N and longitudes 6\u00b0 W and 36\u00b0 E. Its west-east length, from the Strait of Gibraltar to the Gulf of Iskenderun, on the southwestern coast of Turkey, is approximately 4,000 km (2,500 miles). The sea's average north-south length, from Croatia's southern shoreto Libya, is approximately 800 km (500 miles).The sea was an important route for merchants and travellers of ancient times, facilitating trade and cultural exchange between peoples of the region. The history of the Mediterranean region is crucial to understanding the origins and development of many modern societies.The countries surrounding the Mediterranean in clockwise order are Spain, France, Monaco, Italy, Slovenia, Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro, Albania, Greece, Turkey, Syria, Lebanon, Israel, Egypt, Libya, Tunisia, Algeria, and Morocco; Malta and Cyprus are island countries in the sea. In addition, the Gaza Strip and the British Overseas Territories of Gibraltar and Akrotiri and Dhekelia have coastlines on the sea.\nThe green-eared barbet (Psilopogon faiostrictus) is an Asian barbet.  The green-eared barbet is a resident breeder in southern China, Cambodia,    Laos,   Thailand  and  Vietnam. It is a species of broadleaf evergreen and mixed or open woodlands at up to 900 m altitude. It nests in a tree hole.This barbet is 24.5\u201327 cm in length. It is a plump bird, with a short neck, large head and short tail. The adult has a white-streaked brown head and breast, green ear coverts, mainly dark bill,  and green-streaked yellow belly. The rest of the plumage is green. Both sexes and immature birds are similar. This species resembles lineated barbet, but is smaller, has the distinctive green ear patch, a darker bill and a dark, rather than yellow, eye-ring.The male\u2019s territorial call is a loud took-a-prruk. Another call is a mellow pooouk.\nEul\u00e0lia Ferrer Ribot (1776-1850) was a Spanish printer.She was the daughter of Rafael Ferrer Costa and Maria Ribot, married in 1799 to Antoni Brusi Mirabent (d. 1821), and mother of Antoni Brusi Ferrer. She and her spouse were both registered as printers and publishers in cooperation. During the Peninsular War, they published the loyalist papers Gazeta militar y pol\u00edtica del Principado de Catalunya and Diario de Barcelona. Because of this, they were given the privilege and monopoly of lithography after the fall of Napoleon, which they introduced to the Spanish press in 1819. They provided the royal house with lithographs. She became sole director as widowed in 1821. In 1823, their monopoly was abolished, but Eulalia sued the state and managed to delay it until 1825. Her son succeeded her in 1838.\nGreece, officially the Hellenic Republic (Greek: \u0395\u03bb\u03bb\u03b7\u03bd\u03b9\u03ba\u03ae \u0394\u03b7\u03bc\u03bf\u03ba\u03c1\u03b1\u03c4\u03af\u03b1), also known as Hellas (Greek: \u0395\u03bb\u03bb\u03ac\u03c2), is a country located in Southern and Southeast Europe, with a population of approximately 11 million as of 2016. Athens is the nation's capital and largest city, followed by Thessaloniki.Greece is located at the crossroads of Europe, Asia, and Africa. Situated on the southern tip of the Balkan Peninsula, it shares land borders with Albania to the northwest, North Macedonia and Bulgaria to the north, and Turkey to the northeast. The Aegean Sea lies to the east of the mainland, the Ionian Sea to the west, the Cretan Sea and the Mediterranean Sea to the south. Greece has the longest coastline on the Mediterranean Basin and the 11th longest coastline in the world at 13,676 km (8,498 mi) in length, featuring a large number of islands, of which 227 are inhabited. Eighty percent of Greece is mountainous, with Mount Olympus being the highest peak at 2,918 metres (9,573 ft). The country consists of nine geographic regions: Macedonia, Central Greece, the Peloponnese, Thessaly, Epirus, the Aegean Islands (including the Dodecanese and Cyclades), Thrace, Crete, and the Ionian Islands.Greece is considered the cradle of Western civilisation, being the birthplace of democracy, Western philosophy, Western literature, historiography, political science, major scientific and mathematical principles, Western drama and notably the Olympic Games. From the eighth century BC, the Greeks were organised into various independent city-states, known as poleis (singular polis), which spanned the entire Mediterranean region and the Black Sea. Philip of Macedon united most of the Greek mainland in the fourth century BC, with his son Alexander the Great rapidly conquering much of the ancient world, from the eastern Mediterranean to India. Greece was annexed by Rome in the second century BC, becoming an integral part of the Roman Empire and its successor, the Byzantine Empire, in which Greek language and culture were dominant. Rooted in the first century A.D., the Greek Orthodox Church helped shape modern Greek identity and transmitted Greek traditions to the wider Orthodox World. Falling under Ottoman dominion in the mid-15th century, the modern nation state of Greece emerged in 1830 following a war of independence. Greece's rich historical legacy is reflected by its 18 UNESCO World Heritage Sites.The sovereign state of Greece is a unitary parliamentary republic and developed country with an advanced high-income economy, a high quality of life, and a very high standard of living. A founding member of the United Nations, Greece was the tenth member to join the European Communities (precursor to the European Union) and has been part of the Eurozone since 2001. It is also a member of numerous other international institutions, including the Council of Europe, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), the World Trade Organization (WTO), the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE), and the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie (OIF). Greece's unique cultural heritage, large tourism industry, prominent shipping sector and geostrategic importance classify it as a middle power. It is the largest economy in the Balkans, where it is an important regional investor.\nCalypso Deep, located in the Hellenic Trench, Ionian Sea south-west of Pylos, Greece, is the deepest part of the Mediterranean Sea, with a maximum depth of 5,267 m (17,280 ft), at 36\u00b034\u2032N 21\u00b08\u2032E.\nStrenuaeva is a genus of Cambrian trilobite thought to show sexual dimorphism.\nRasm Abed (Arabic: \u0631\u0633\u0645 \u0639\u0627\u0628\u062f\u200e)  is a Syrian village located in Abu al-Duhur Nahiyah in Idlib District, Idlib.  According to the Syria Central Bureau of Statistics (CBS), Rasm Abed had a population of 1372 in the 2004 census.\nThe Kast Off Kinks are a band composed of former members of the band The Kinks. They mostly tour Europe and attend reunions for fans and for charity, such as the Leukemia Research Fund. They have put out one EP, The Archway EP, in conjunction with The Kinks' fan club.\n", "path": ["eulalia ferrer ribot", "Barcelona", "Mediterranean Sea", "calypso deep", "Greece"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the parent taxon of tamarix?", "correct_answer": "tamaricaceae", "model_answer": " [/INST] Answer: The parent taxon of Tamarix (the genus of tamarisk plants) is the flowering plant order Caryophyllales.\n\nExplanation: The Tamaricaceae is a flowering plant family that includes", "context": "Pietro Caucchioli (born 22 August 1975 in Bovolone, Veneto) is an Italian professional road racing cyclist. His two-stage wins at the 2001 Giro d'Italia and a podium finish (3rd place) at the 2002 Giro are his finest career accomplishments.\nBaravand-e Olya (Persian: \u0628\u0631\u0648\u0646\u062f\u0639\u0644\u064a\u0627\u200e, also Romanized as Bar\u0101vand-e \u2018Oly\u0101 and Barevand-e \u2018Oly\u0101; also known as Bar\u0101vand and Bar\u0101vand-e B\u0101l\u0101) is a village in Qalkhani Rural District, Gahvareh District, Dalahu County, Kermanshah Province, Iran. At the 2006 census, its population was 87, in 18 families.\nHabiganj-1 is a constituency represented in the Jatiya Sangsad (National Parliament) of Bangladesh since 2019 by Gazi Mohammad Shahnawaz of the Awami League.\nBadir Shoukri (born 20 August 1926) is an Egyptian former sports shooter. He competed in the trap event at the 1968 Summer Olympics.\nThe genus Tamarix (tamarisk, salt cedar) is composed of about 50\u201360 species of flowering plants in the family Tamaricaceae, native to drier areas of Eurasia and Africa. The generic name originated in Latin and may refer to the Tamaris River in Hispania Tarraconensis (Spain).\nThe Tamaricaceae  are a flowering plant family (the tamarisk family) containing four genera and a total of 78 known species. In the 1980s, the family was classified in the Violales under the Cronquist system; more modern classifications (Angiosperm Phylogeny Group) place them in the Caryophyllales.The family is native to drier areas of Europe, Asia, and Africa. Many grow on saline soils, tolerating up to 15,000 ppm soluble salt and can also tolerate alkaline conditions. The leaves are generally scale-like, measure 1\u20135 mm long, overlap each other along the stem, and in some species are encrusted with salt secretions.\n", "path": ["tamarix", "tamaricaceae"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the replaces of the country location of citizenship of the capital of the country location of origin of la valise ou le cercueil?", "correct_answer": "the thirteen colonies", "model_answer": " [/INST] The country location of citizenship of the capital of the country location of origin of \"La Valise ou le Cercueil\" is France.\n\nExplanation: \"La Valise ou le Cercueil\" is a French", "context": "Quixer\u00e9 is a municipality in the state of Cear\u00e1 in the Northeast region of Brazil.\nOscar Jackson, Jr. (born October 29, 1967), better known by his stage name Paris, is an American rapper from San Francisco, California, known for his highly charged political and socially conscious lyrics. Influenced by the Black Panthers, he was once a member of the Nation of Islam.\nAlexandru Davila (Romanian pronunciation: [alek\u02c8sandru davi\u02c8la]; February 12, 1862 \u2013 October 19, 1929) was a Romanian dramatist, diplomat, public administrator, and memoirist.\nThe Matsuoka Hoyoen Sanatorium (\u56fd\u7acb\u7642\u990a\u6240\u677e\u4e18\u4fdd\u990a\u5712, Kokuritsury\u014dy\u014djo Matsuokahoy\u014den) or National Sanatorium Matsuoka Hoyoen is a sanatorium for leprosy and ex-leprosy patients situated in Aomori, Aomori, Japan that opened in 1909.\nFrance (French: [f\u0281\u0251\u0303s]), officially the French Republic (French: R\u00e9publique fran\u00e7aise, pronounced [\u0281epyblik f\u0281\u0251\u0303s\u025b\u02d0z]), is a sovereign state whose territory consists of metropolitan France in Western Europe and several overseas regions and territories. The metropolitan area of France extends from the Mediterranean Sea to the English Channel and the North Sea, and from the Rhine to the Atlantic Ocean. It is bordered by Belgium, Luxembourg and Germany to the northeast, Switzerland and Italy to the east, and Andorra and Spain to the south. The overseas territories include French Guiana in South America and several islands in the Atlantic, Pacific and Indian oceans. The country's 18 integral regions (five of which are situated overseas) span a combined area of 643,801 square kilometres (248,573 sq mi) and a total population of 67.0 million (as of July 2019). France is a unitary semi-presidential republic with its capital in Paris, the country's largest city and main cultural and commercial centre. Other major urban areas include Lyon, Marseille, Toulouse, Bordeaux, Lille and Nice.During the Iron Age, what is now metropolitan France was inhabited by the Gauls, a Celtic people. Rome annexed the area in 51 BC, holding it until the arrival of Germanic Franks in 476, who formed the Kingdom of Francia. The Treaty of Verdun of 843 partitioned Francia into East Francia, Middle Francia and West Francia. West Francia, which became the Kingdom of France in 987, emerged as a major European power in the Late Middle Ages, following its victory in the Hundred Years' War (1337\u20131453). During the Renaissance, French culture flourished and a global colonial empire was established, which by the 20th century would become the second largest in the world. The 16th century was dominated by religious civil wars between Catholics and Protestants (Huguenots). France became Europe's dominant cultural, political, and military power in the 17th century under Louis XIV. In the late 18th century, the French Revolution overthrew the absolute monarchy, establishing one of modern history's earliest republics and drafting the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen, which expresses the nation's ideals to this day.In the 19th century, Napoleon took power and established the First French Empire. His subsequent Napoleonic Wars (1803\u201315) shaped the course of continental Europe. Following the collapse of the Empire, France endured a tumultuous succession of governments culminating with the establishment of the French Third Republic in 1870. France was a major participant in World War I, from which it emerged victorious, and was one of the Allies in World War II, but came under occupation by the Axis powers in 1940. Following liberation in 1944, a Fourth Republic was established and later dissolved in the course of the Algerian War. The Fifth Republic, led by Charles de Gaulle, was formed in 1958 and remains today. Algeria and nearly all the other colonies became independent in the 1960s, with most retaining close economic and military connections with France.France has long been a global centre of art, science, and philosophy. It hosts the world's fourth-largest number of UNESCO World Heritage Sites and is the leading tourist destination, receiving around 83 million foreign visitors annually. France is a developed country with the world's sixth-largest economy by nominal GDP, and tenth-largest by purchasing power parity. In terms of aggregate household wealth, it ranks fourth in the world. France performs well in international rankings of education, health care, life expectancy, and human development. France is considered a great power in global affairs, being one of the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council with the power to veto and an official nuclear-weapon state. It is a leading member state of the European Union and the Eurozone, and a member of the Group of 7, North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), the World Trade Organization (WTO), and La Francophonie.\nThe United States of America (USA), commonly known as the United States (U.S. or US) or America, is a country comprising 50 states, a federal district, five major self-governing territories, and various possessions. At 3.8 million sq mi (9.8 million km2), the United States is the world's third or fourth largest country by total area and is slightly smaller than the entire continent of Europe's 3.93 million sq mi (10.2 million km2). With a population of more than 327 million people, the U.S. is the third most populous country. Most of the country is located contiguously in North America between Canada and Mexico. The extremely diverse geography, climate, and wildlife of the United States make it one of the world's 17 megadiverse countries.Paleo-Indians migrated from Siberia to the North American mainland at least 12,000 years ago. European colonization began in the 16th century. The United States emerged from the thirteen British colonies established along the East Coast. Following the French and Indian War, numerous disputes between Great Britain and the colonies led to the American Revolution, which began in 1775, and the subsequent Declaration of Independence in 1776. The war ended in 1783 with the United States becoming the first country to gain independence from a European power. The current constitution was adopted in 1788, with the first ten amendments, collectively named the Bill of Rights, being ratified in 1791 to guarantee many fundamental civil liberties. The United States embarked on a vigorous expansion across North America throughout the 19th century, acquiring new territories, displacing Native American tribes, and gradually admitting new states until it spanned the continent by 1848.During the second half of the 19th century, the Civil War led to the abolition of slavery. By the end of the century, the United States had extended into the Pacific Ocean, and its economy, driven in large part by the Industrial Revolution, began to soar. The Spanish\u2013American War and World War I confirmed the country's status as a global military power. The United States emerged from World War II as a global superpower and a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council. The end of the Cold War and the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 left the United States as the world's sole superpower.The United States is a federal republic and a representative democracy. It is a founding member of the United Nations, World Bank, International Monetary Fund, Organization of American States (OAS), and many other international organizations. The United States is a highly developed country, with the world's largest economy by nominal GDP and second-largest economy by PPP, accounting for approximately a quarter of global GDP. The U.S. economy is largely post-industrial, characterized by the dominance of services and knowledge-based activities, although the manufacturing sector remains the second-largest in the world. The United States is the world's largest importer and the second largest exporter of goods, by value. Although its population is only 4.3% of the world total, the U.S. holds 31% of the total wealth in the world, the largest share of global wealth concentrated in a single country.Despite income and wealth disparities, the United States continues to rank very high in measures of socioeconomic performance, including average wage, human development, per capita GDP, and worker productivity. The United States is the foremost military power in the world, making up a third of global military spending, and is a leading political, cultural, and scientific force internationally.\nThe Thirteen Colonies, also known as the Thirteen British Colonies or the Thirteen American Colonies, were a group of colonies of Great Britain on the Atlantic coast of America founded in the 17th and 18th centuries which declared independence in 1776 and formed the United States of America. The Thirteen Colonies had very similar political, constitutional, and legal systems and were dominated by Protestant English-speakers. They were part of Britain's possessions in the New World, which also included colonies in Canada, the Caribbean, and Florida.Between 1625 and 1775, the colonial population grew from roughly 2,000 to 2.4 million, displacing American Indians. This population included people subject to a system of slavery which was legal in all of the colonies prior to the American Revolutionary War. In the 18th century, the British government operated its colonies under a policy of mercantilism, in which the central government administered its possessions for the economic benefit of the mother country. The Thirteen Colonies had a high degree of self-governance and active local elections, and they resisted London's demands for more control. The French and Indian War (1754\u201363) against France and its Indian allies led to growing tensions between Britain and the Thirteen Colonies. In the 1750s, the colonies began collaborating with one another instead of dealing directly with Britain. These inter-colonial activities cultivated a sense of shared American identity and led to calls for protection of the colonists' \"Rights as Englishmen\", especially the principle of \"no taxation without representation\". Grievances with the British government led to the American Revolution, in which the colonies collaborated in forming the Continental Congress. The colonists fought the American Revolutionary War (1775\u201383) with the aid of France and, to a significantly smaller degree, the Dutch Republic and Spain.\nLa Valise ou le Cercueil (English: \"The suitcase or the coffin\") is a 2011 French documentary about the Pied-Noirs who self-rapatriated from French Algeria to mainland France after the \u00c9vian Accords at the end of the Algerian War. It was directed by Charly Cassan, who was awarded a knighthood in the Order of Academic Palms for the film.\nJack Thomas Snow Jr. (born February 26, 1968) is a former Major League Baseball player. He played all but two games in his career as a first baseman, and played nine of his 13\u00bd seasons with the San Francisco Giants. He was known for his exceptional defense.  After his retirement as a player, Snow worked in radio and television broadcasting. He has also worked as a special assistant to the general manager for the Giants.\n", "path": ["la valise ou le cercueil", "France", "Paris", "United States of America", "the thirteen colonies"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the country location of origin of the continent of the country location of citizenship of the performer of chi mai?", "correct_answer": "Sweden", "model_answer": " [/INST] Italy\n\nEnnio Morricone is an Italian composer who wrote \"Chi Mai,\" a famous and internationally recognized composition. The term \"Italy\" refers to a European country located in the middle of the Mediterranean Sea. Italy is home", "context": "Linlithgow Folk Festival is an annual folk music festival held in Linlithgow, West Lothian, Scotland.The first festival was held in 1999 as part of a renaissance of interest in folk music within West Lothian. Normally held on the second full weekend of September, it follows the pattern set by a number of smaller folk festivals in Scotland - a combination of sessions in local pubs and bars and organised musical events. These include paying and free concerts, workshops, and an increasing number of events in interesting local venues (at the  town's canal basin and on canal boats, in the local museum, local churches and sometimes in Linlithgow Palace). The Festival Association arranges several other events as well; it has been successful in bringing big names to the town in recent years, including Tom Paxton, Eric Bogle and Ralph McTell.The Linlithgow Folk Festival Association has been involved in the resurgence of interest in the renowned Glaswegian songwriter and performer Matt McGinn, and puts on an annual 'Matt McGinn night' at the beginning of March.\nSecret Hitler is a hidden identity party game developed by Goat, Wolf, & Cabbage LLC, manufactured by Breaking Games and distributed by Blackbox. The game was designed by Max Temkin, Mike Boxleiter and Tommy Maranges, with artwork created by Mackenzie Schubert, and first released on August 25, 2016. In Secret Hitler, players assume the roles of liberals and fascists in the Reichstag of the Weimar Republic, with one player becoming Adolf Hitler. To win the game, both parties are set to competitively enact liberal and fascist policies, respectively, or complete a secondary objective directly involving Hitler.\nItaly (Italian: Italia [i\u02c8ta\u02d0lja] (listen)), officially the Italian Republic (Italian: Repubblica Italiana [re\u02c8pubblika ita\u02c8lja\u02d0na]), is a European country consisting of a peninsula delimited by the Italian Alps and surrounded by several islands. Located in the middle of the Mediterranean sea and traversed along its length by the Apennines, Italy has a largely temperate seasonal and Mediterranean climate. The country covers an area of 301,340 km2 (116,350 sq mi) and shares open land borders with France, Slovenia, Austria, Switzerland and the enclaved microstates of Vatican City and San Marino. Italy has a territorial exclave in Switzerland (Campione) and a maritime exclave in the Tunisian Sea (Lampedusa). With around 60 million inhabitants, Italy is the fourth-most populous member state of the European Union.Due to its central geographic location in Southern Europe and the Mediterranean, Italy has historically been home to myriad peoples and cultures. In addition to the various ancient peoples dispersed throughout modern-day Italy, the most predominant being the Indo-European Italic peoples who gave the peninsula its name, beginning from the classical era, Phoenicians and Carthaginians founded colonies mostly in insular Italy, Greeks established settlements in the so-called Magna Graecia of southern Italy, while Etruscans and Celts inhabited central and northern Italy respectively. An Italic tribe known as the Latins formed the Roman Kingdom in the 8th century BC, which eventually became a republic with a government of the Senate and the People. The Roman Republic initially conquered and assimilated its neighbours on the peninsula, eventually expanding and conquering parts of Europe, North Africa and  Asia. By the first century BC, the Roman Empire emerged as the dominant power in the Mediterranean Basin and became the leading cultural, political and religious centre of Western civilisation, inaugurating the Pax Romana, a period of more than 200 years during which Italy's law, technology, economy, art, and literature developed. Italy remained the homeland of the Romans and the metropole of the empire, whose legacy can also be observed in the global distribution of culture, governments, Christianity and the Latin script.During the Early Middle Ages, Italy endured sociopolitical collapse and barbarian invasions, but by the 11th century, numerous rival city-states and maritime republics, mainly in the northern and central regions of Italy, rose to great prosperity through trade, commerce and banking, laying the groundwork for modern capitalism. These mostly independent statelets served as Europe's main trading hubs with Asia and the Near East, often enjoying a greater degree of democracy than the larger feudal monarchies that were consolidating throughout Europe; however, part of central Italy was under the control of the theocratic Papal States, while Southern Italy remained largely feudal until the 19th century, partially as a result of a succession of Byzantine, Arab, Norman, Angevin, Aragonese and other foreign conquests of the region. The Renaissance began in Italy and spread to the rest of Europe, bringing a renewed interest in humanism, science, exploration and art. Italian culture flourished, producing famous scholars, artists and polymaths. During the Middle Ages, Italian explorers discovered new routes to the Far East and the New World, helping to usher in the European Age of Discovery. Nevertheless, Italy's commercial and political power significantly waned with the opening of trade routes that bypassed the Mediterranean. Furthermore, centuries of infighting between the Italian city-states, such as the Italian Wars of the 15th and 16th centuries, left the region fragmented, and it was subsequently conquered and further divided by European powers such as France, Spain and Austria.By the mid-19th century, rising Italian nationalism and calls for independence from foreign control led to a period of revolutionary political upheaval. After centuries of foreign domination and political division, Italy was almost entirely unified in 1861, establishing the Kingdom of Italy as a great power. From the late 19th century to the early 20th century, Italy rapidly industrialised, namely in the north, and acquired a colonial empire, while the south remained largely impoverished and excluded from industrialisation, fuelling a large and influential diaspora. Despite being one of the main victors in World War I, Italy entered a period of economic crisis and social turmoil, leading to the rise of a fascist dictatorship in 1922. Participation in World War II on the Axis side ended in military defeat, economic destruction and the Italian Civil War. Following the liberation of Italy and the rise of the resistance, the country abolished the monarchy, established a democratic Republic and enjoyed a prolonged economic boom, becoming a highly developed country.Today, Italy is considered to be one of the world's most culturally and economically advanced countries, with its economy ranking eighth-largest in the world and third in the Eurozone by nominal GDP. Italy has the sixth-largest worldwide national wealth, the third-largest central bank gold reserve, and a very high life expectancy. The country plays a prominent role in regional and global economic, military, cultural and diplomatic affairs; it is both a regional power and a great power, and is ranked the world's eighth most-powerful military. Italy is a founding and leading member of the European Union and a member of numerous international institutions, including the UN, NATO, the OECD, the OSCE, the WTO, the G7, the G20, the Union for the Mediterranean, the Council of Europe, Uniting for Consensus, the Schengen Area and many more. The country have greatly influenced and contributed to diverse fields, notably the arts, music, literature, philosophy, science and technology, fashion, cinema, cuisine, sports, as well as jurisprudence, banking and business. As a reflection of its cultural wealth, Italy is home to the world's largest number of World Heritage Sites (54), and is the fifth-most visited country.\nEurope is a Swedish rock band formed in Upplands V\u00e4sby in 1979,  by vocalist Joey Tempest, guitarist John Norum, bassist Peter Olsson, and drummer Tony Reno. They got a major breakthrough in Sweden in 1982 by winning the televised competition \"Rock-SM\" (Swedish Rock Championships): it was the first time this competition was held, and Europe became a larger success than the competition itself.Since their formation, Europe has released eleven studio albums, three live albums, three compilations and twenty-four music videos.Europe rose to international fame in the 1980s with their third album, 1986's The Final Countdown, which has sold over 3 million copies in the United States and 15 million copies worldwide (including album and single). Europe have sold over 25 million records worldwide.  The band has had two top 20 albums on the Billboard 200 chart (The Final Countdown  and Out of This World) and three top 30 singles on the Billboard Hot 100 chart (\"The Final Countdown\", \"Rock the Night\" and \"Carrie\").Europe went on hiatus in 1992, reunited temporarily for a one-off performance in Stockholm on New Year's Eve 1999 and announced an official reunion in 2003. Since then the band has released six albums, Start from the Dark (2004), Secret Society (2006), Last Look at Eden (2009), Bag of Bones (2012), War of Kings (2015) and Walk the Earth (2017).Europe has achieved new attention in the US due to being featured in a GEICO Insurance cable television commercial campaign viewed for many months across the US in 2015\u201316.The band is mainly influenced by Whitesnake, Deep Purple, Rainbow, Led Zeppelin, Thin Lizzy, UFO and Michael Schenker Group.\n\"Chi Mai\" (Italian: whoever) is a composition by Ennio Morricone written in 1971. It was used in the films Maddalena (1971) and Le Professionnel (1981), as well as in the television series An Englishman's Castle and The Life and Times of David Lloyd George. Because of its appearance on the latter television programme, \"Chi Mai\" reached number 2 on the UK Singles Chart in 1981.\nEnnio Morricone, Knight Grand Cross (Italian: [\u02c8\u025bnnjo morri\u02c8ko\u02d0ne]; born 10 November 1928) is an Italian composer, orchestrator, conductor, and former trumpet player, writing in a wide range of musical styles. Since 1961, Morricone has composed over 400 scores for cinema and television, as well as over 100 classical works. His score to 1966's The Good, the Bad and the Ugly is considered one of the most influential soundtracks in history and was inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame. Ennio Morricone has influenced many artists from film scoring to other styles and genres, including Hans Zimmer, Danger Mouse, Dire Straits, Muse, Metallica, and Radiohead.His filmography includes over 70 award-winning films, including all Sergio Leone films (since A Fistful of Dollars), all Giuseppe Tornatore films (since Cinema Paradiso), The Battle of Algiers, Dario Argento's Animal Trilogy, 1900, Exorcist II, Days of Heaven, several major films in French cinema, in particular the comedy trilogy La Cage aux Folles I, II, III and Le Professionnel, as well as The Thing, The Mission, The Untouchables, Mission to Mars, Bugsy, Disclosure, In the Line of Fire, Bulworth, Ripley's Game and The Hateful Eight.After playing the trumpet in jazz bands in the 1940s, he became a studio arranger for RCA Victor and in 1955 started ghost writing for film and theatre. Throughout his career, he has composed music for artists such as Paul Anka, Mina, Milva, Zucchero and Andrea Bocelli. From 1960 to 1975, Morricone gained international fame for composing music for westerns.  With an estimated 10 million copies sold, Once Upon a Time in the West is one of the best-selling scores worldwide.He also scored seven westerns for Sergio Corbucci, Duccio Tessari's Ringo duology and Sergio Sollima's The Big Gundown and Face to Face. Morricone worked extensively for other film genres with directors such as John Carpenter, Bernardo Bertolucci, Mauro Bolognini, Giuliano Montaldo, Roland Joff\u00e9, Roman Polanski and Henri Verneuil.  His acclaimed soundtrack for The Mission (1986) was certified gold in the United States. The album Yo-Yo Ma Plays Ennio Morricone stayed 105 weeks on the Billboard Top Classical Albums.Morricone's best-known compositions include \"The Ecstasy of Gold\", \"Se Telefonando\", \"Man with a Harmonica\", \"Here's to You\", the UK No. 2 single \"Chi Mai\", \"Gabriel's Oboe\" and \"E Pi\u00f9 Ti Penso\". He functioned during the period 1966\u20131980 as a main member of Il Gruppo, one of the first experimental composers collectives. As of 2013, Ennio Morricone has sold over 70 million records worldwide. In 1971, he received a \"Targa d'Oro\" for the worldwide sales of 22 million.In 1969, he co-founded Forum Music Village, a prestigious recording studio. From the 1970s, Morricone excelled in Hollywood, composing for prolific American directors such as Don Siegel, Mike Nichols, Brian De Palma, Barry Levinson, Oliver Stone, Warren Beatty, John Carpenter and Quentin Tarantino. In 1977, he composed the official theme for the 1978 FIFA World Cup. He continued to compose music for European productions, such as Marco Polo, La piovra, Nostromo, Fateless, Karol and En mai, fais ce qu'il te plait. Morricone's music has been reused in television series, including The Simpsons and The Sopranos, and in many films, including Inglourious Basterds and Django Unchained.In 2007, he received the Academy Honorary Award \"for his magnificent and multifaceted contributions to the art of film music.\" He has been nominated for a further six Oscars. In 2016, Morricone received his first Academy Award for his score to Quentin Tarantino's film The Hateful Eight (2015), at the time becoming the oldest person ever to win a competitive Oscar. His other achievements include three Grammy Awards, three Golden Globes, six BAFTAs, ten David di Donatello, eleven Nastro d'Argento, two European Film Awards, the Golden Lion Honorary Award and the Polar Music Prize in 2010.\nKids Can Rock and Roll is a children's television program that aired from 1993-1996 in Canada.  It was produced by Children's Hour Productions.  the series ran another two years on the YTV children's cable channel.The show featured the rock band Kideo, which consisted of Buddy Goodfellow on bass, Ace Manners on guitar, and P.J. Styles on drums, with all three members contributing vocals.  Each band member had a signature color - Buddy was green, Ace was blue, and P.J. was red. These colors were reflected in their clothing, hair, masks, and face make-up.Each episode featured four original rock songs for kids, including a live concert video. The band members also performed various activities with the intent of teaching the young viewers certain moral lessons.  Additional segments in the show included \"Air-Robic Rock\", Kideo Eye-View Movies, and Fan Mail.What set Kideo apart from many other children's groups was that they wrote all their own songs, and played their own instruments. They released three albums entitled \"Kids Can Rock And Roll\" (1986), \"In A World Of Black And White\" (1989), and \"The Name Of The Game\" (1993). They also released two videos - \"KIDEO In Concert\" and a KIDEO puppet video entitled \"The Puppetual World Of Rock And Roll\". Both videos featured songs and scenes from the TV series, but included never-before-seen hosting segments by KIDEO.\nSweden (Swedish: Sverige [\u02c8sv\u00e6rj\u025b] (listen)), formal name: the Kingdom of Sweden (Swedish: Konungariket Sverige ), is a Scandinavian Nordic country in Northern Europe. It borders Norway to the west and north and Finland to the east, and is connected to Denmark in the southwest by a bridge-tunnel across the \u00d6resund, a strait at the Swedish-Danish border. At 450,295 square kilometres (173,860 sq mi), Sweden is the largest country in Northern Europe, the third-largest country in the European Union and the fifth largest country in Europe by area. Sweden has a total population of 10.3 million of which 2.5 million have a foreign background. It has a low population density of 22 inhabitants per square kilometre (57/sq mi). The highest concentration is in the central and southern half of the country.Sweden is part of the geographical area of Fennoscandia. The climate is in general very mild for its northerly latitude due to significant maritime influence. In spite of the high latitude, Sweden often has warm continental summers, being located in between the North Atlantic, the Baltic Sea and the vast Eurasian Russian landmass. The general climate and environment varies significantly from the south and north due to the vast latitudal difference and much of Sweden has reliably cold and snowy winters. It also has a vast coastline with many offshore islands, many lakes, a large proportion of the country covered by forests and includes a portion of the Scandinavian Mountains.Germanic peoples have inhabited Sweden since prehistoric times, emerging into history as the Geats (Swedish G\u00f6tar) and Swedes (Svear) and constituting the sea peoples known as the Norsemen. Southern Sweden is predominantly agricultural, while the north is heavily forested.  Today,  the sovereign state of Sweden is a constitutional monarchy and parliamentary democracy, with a monarch as head of state, like its neighbour Norway. The capital city is Stockholm, which is also the most populous city in the country. Legislative power is vested in the 349-member unicameral Riksdag. Executive power is exercised by the government chaired by the prime minister. Sweden is a unitary state, currently divided into 21 counties and 290 municipalities.An independent Swedish state emerged during the early 12th century. After the Black Death in the middle of the 14th century killed about a third of the Scandinavian population, the Hanseatic League threatened Scandinavia's culture, finances and languages. This led to the forming of the Scandinavian Kalmar Union in 1397, which Sweden left in 1523. When Sweden became involved in the Thirty Years War on the Reformist side, an expansion of its territories began and eventually the Swedish Empire was formed. This became one of the great powers of Europe until the early 18th century. Swedish territories outside the Scandinavian Peninsula were gradually lost during the 18th and 19th centuries, ending with the annexation of present-day Finland by Russia in 1809. The last war in which Sweden was directly involved was in 1814, when Norway was militarily forced into personal union. Since then, Sweden has been at peace, maintaining an official policy of neutrality in foreign affairs. The union with Norway was peacefully dissolved in 1905. Sweden was formally neutral through both world wars and the Cold War, albeit Sweden has since 2009 openly moved towards cooperation with NATO. Sweden has close relations to its Nordic neighbours, including linguistically, with the Swedish language being an official language in Finland and Swedish also being mutually intelligible with Danish and Norwegian.After the end of the Cold War, Sweden joined the European Union (EU) on 1 January 1995, but declined NATO membership, as well as Eurozone (EZ) membership following a referendum. It is also a member of the United Nations, the Nordic Council, the Council of Europe, the World Trade Organization and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). Sweden maintains a Nordic social welfare system that provides universal health care and tertiary education for its citizens. It has the world's eleventh-highest per capita income and ranks highly in numerous metrics of national performance, including quality of life, health, education, protection of civil liberties, economic competitiveness, equality, prosperity and human development.\nJamie Weston (born 8 January 1976 in  Scotland) is a former Scottish rugby union player who played for Glasgow Warriors at the  Scrum-half position.\n", "path": ["chi mai", "ennio morricone", "Italy", "Europe", "Sweden"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the legislative body of the country location of origin of the continent of the country location of citizenship of ferdinand rothbart?", "correct_answer": "the riksdag", "model_answer": " [/INST] The legislative body of the country of origin of Ferdinand Rothbart is the Riksdag of Sweden.\n\nFerdinand Rothbart was born in Germany, but the context mentions that he served as a curator for", "context": "KMUW (89.1 FM), is a National Public Radio member station in Wichita, Kansas, United States, owned by Wichita State University.\nFerdinand Rothbart (3 October 1823, Roth - 31 January 1899, Munich) was a German draftsman, illustrator and history painter. He also served as curator for the Staatliche Graphische Sammlung in Munich.\nEurope is a Swedish rock band formed in Upplands V\u00e4sby in 1979,  by vocalist Joey Tempest, guitarist John Norum, bassist Peter Olsson, and drummer Tony Reno. They got a major breakthrough in Sweden in 1982 by winning the televised competition \"Rock-SM\" (Swedish Rock Championships): it was the first time this competition was held, and Europe became a larger success than the competition itself.Since their formation, Europe has released eleven studio albums, three live albums, three compilations and twenty-four music videos.Europe rose to international fame in the 1980s with their third album, 1986's The Final Countdown, which has sold over 3 million copies in the United States and 15 million copies worldwide (including album and single). Europe have sold over 25 million records worldwide.  The band has had two top 20 albums on the Billboard 200 chart (The Final Countdown  and Out of This World) and three top 30 singles on the Billboard Hot 100 chart (\"The Final Countdown\", \"Rock the Night\" and \"Carrie\").Europe went on hiatus in 1992, reunited temporarily for a one-off performance in Stockholm on New Year's Eve 1999 and announced an official reunion in 2003. Since then the band has released six albums, Start from the Dark (2004), Secret Society (2006), Last Look at Eden (2009), Bag of Bones (2012), War of Kings (2015) and Walk the Earth (2017).Europe has achieved new attention in the US due to being featured in a GEICO Insurance cable television commercial campaign viewed for many months across the US in 2015\u201316.The band is mainly influenced by Whitesnake, Deep Purple, Rainbow, Led Zeppelin, Thin Lizzy, UFO and Michael Schenker Group.\nGermany (German: Deutschland, German pronunciation: [\u02c8d\u0254\u028ft\u0283lant]), officially the Federal Republic of Germany (German: Bundesrepublik Deutschland, listen ), is a country in Central and Western Europe, lying between the Baltic and North Seas to the north and the Alps, Lake Constance and the High Rhine to the south. It borders Denmark to the north, Poland and the Czech Republic to the east, Austria and Switzerland to the south, France to the southwest, and Luxembourg, Belgium and the Netherlands to the west.Germany includes 16 constituent states, covers an area of 357,386 square kilometres (137,988 sq mi), and has a largely temperate seasonal climate. With 83 million inhabitants, it is the second most populous state of Europe after Russia, the most populous state lying entirely in Europe, as well as the most populous member state of the European Union. Germany is a very decentralised country. Its capital and largest metropolis is Berlin, while Frankfurt serves as its financial capital and has the country's busiest airport. Germany's largest urban area is the Ruhr, with its main centres of Dortmund and Essen. The country's other major cities are Hamburg, Munich, Cologne, Stuttgart, D\u00fcsseldorf, Leipzig, Bremen, Dresden, Hanover, and Nuremberg.Various Germanic tribes have inhabited the northern parts of modern Germany since classical antiquity. A region named Germania was documented before AD 100. During the Migration Period, the Germanic tribes expanded southward. Beginning in the 10th century, German territories formed a central part of the Holy Roman Empire. During the 16th century, northern German regions became the centre of the Protestant Reformation. After the collapse of the Holy Roman Empire, the German Confederation was formed in 1815. The German revolutions of 1848\u201349 resulted in the Frankfurt Parliament establishing major democratic rights.In 1871, Germany became a nation state when most of the German states unified (except Switzerland and Austria) into the Prussian-dominated German Empire. After World War I and the revolution of 1918\u201319, the Empire was replaced by the parliamentary Weimar Republic. The Nazi seizure of power in 1933 led to the establishment of a dictatorship, the annexation of Austria, World War II, and the Holocaust. After the end of World War II in Europe and a period of Allied occupation, Austria was re-established as an independent country and two new German states were founded: West Germany, formed from the American, British, and French occupation zones, and East Germany, formed from the Soviet occupation zone. About a quarter of Germany's pre-war territory was annexed by Poland and the Soviet Union leading to the expulsion of Germans. Following the Revolutions of 1989 that ended communist rule in Central and Eastern Europe, the country was reunified on 3 October 1990.Today, the sovereign state of Germany is a federal parliamentary republic led by a chancellor. It is a great power with a strong economy; it has the world's fourth-largest economy by nominal GDP, and the fifth-largest by PPP. As a global leader in several industrial and technological sectors, it is both the world's third-largest exporter and importer of goods. As a highly developed country with a very high standard of living, it upholds a social security and universal health care system, environmental protection, and a tuition-free university education.The Federal Republic of Germany was a founding member of the European Economic Community in 1957 and the European Union in 1993. It is part of the Schengen Area and became a co-founder of the Eurozone in 1999. Germany is a member of the United Nations, NATO, the G7, the G20, and the OECD. Known for its rich cultural history, Germany has been continuously the home of influential and successful artists, philosophers, writers, musicians, film people, sportspeople, entrepreneurs, scientists, engineers, and inventors. Germany has a large number of World Heritage sites and is among the top tourism destinations in the world.\nSweden (Swedish: Sverige [\u02c8sv\u00e6rj\u025b] (listen)), formal name: the Kingdom of Sweden (Swedish: Konungariket Sverige ), is a Scandinavian Nordic country in Northern Europe. It borders Norway to the west and north and Finland to the east, and is connected to Denmark in the southwest by a bridge-tunnel across the \u00d6resund, a strait at the Swedish-Danish border. At 450,295 square kilometres (173,860 sq mi), Sweden is the largest country in Northern Europe, the third-largest country in the European Union and the fifth largest country in Europe by area. Sweden has a total population of 10.3 million of which 2.5 million have a foreign background. It has a low population density of 22 inhabitants per square kilometre (57/sq mi). The highest concentration is in the central and southern half of the country.Sweden is part of the geographical area of Fennoscandia. The climate is in general very mild for its northerly latitude due to significant maritime influence. In spite of the high latitude, Sweden often has warm continental summers, being located in between the North Atlantic, the Baltic Sea and the vast Eurasian Russian landmass. The general climate and environment varies significantly from the south and north due to the vast latitudal difference and much of Sweden has reliably cold and snowy winters. It also has a vast coastline with many offshore islands, many lakes, a large proportion of the country covered by forests and includes a portion of the Scandinavian Mountains.Germanic peoples have inhabited Sweden since prehistoric times, emerging into history as the Geats (Swedish G\u00f6tar) and Swedes (Svear) and constituting the sea peoples known as the Norsemen. Southern Sweden is predominantly agricultural, while the north is heavily forested.  Today,  the sovereign state of Sweden is a constitutional monarchy and parliamentary democracy, with a monarch as head of state, like its neighbour Norway. The capital city is Stockholm, which is also the most populous city in the country. Legislative power is vested in the 349-member unicameral Riksdag. Executive power is exercised by the government chaired by the prime minister. Sweden is a unitary state, currently divided into 21 counties and 290 municipalities.An independent Swedish state emerged during the early 12th century. After the Black Death in the middle of the 14th century killed about a third of the Scandinavian population, the Hanseatic League threatened Scandinavia's culture, finances and languages. This led to the forming of the Scandinavian Kalmar Union in 1397, which Sweden left in 1523. When Sweden became involved in the Thirty Years War on the Reformist side, an expansion of its territories began and eventually the Swedish Empire was formed. This became one of the great powers of Europe until the early 18th century. Swedish territories outside the Scandinavian Peninsula were gradually lost during the 18th and 19th centuries, ending with the annexation of present-day Finland by Russia in 1809. The last war in which Sweden was directly involved was in 1814, when Norway was militarily forced into personal union. Since then, Sweden has been at peace, maintaining an official policy of neutrality in foreign affairs. The union with Norway was peacefully dissolved in 1905. Sweden was formally neutral through both world wars and the Cold War, albeit Sweden has since 2009 openly moved towards cooperation with NATO. Sweden has close relations to its Nordic neighbours, including linguistically, with the Swedish language being an official language in Finland and Swedish also being mutually intelligible with Danish and Norwegian.After the end of the Cold War, Sweden joined the European Union (EU) on 1 January 1995, but declined NATO membership, as well as Eurozone (EZ) membership following a referendum. It is also a member of the United Nations, the Nordic Council, the Council of Europe, the World Trade Organization and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). Sweden maintains a Nordic social welfare system that provides universal health care and tertiary education for its citizens. It has the world's eleventh-highest per capita income and ranks highly in numerous metrics of national performance, including quality of life, health, education, protection of civil liberties, economic competitiveness, equality, prosperity and human development.\nCatocala lineella, the lineella underwing, little lined underwing or steely underwing, is a moth of the family Erebidae. The species was first described by Augustus Radcliffe Grote in 1872. It is found in North America from Ontario and Quebec south to Florida west to Texas and north to Ohio.It was considered to be a subspecies or even a synonym of Catocala amica for a long time.The wingspan is 35\u201340 mm. Adults are on wing from July to August.The larvae feed on the leaves of Quercus species.\nUnited States energy law is a function of the federal government, states, and local governments. At the federal level, it is regulated extensively through the United States Department of Energy.Every state, the Federal government, and the District of Columbia collect some motor vehicle excise taxes.  Specifically, these are excise taxes on gasoline, diesel fuel, and gasohol.  While many western states rely a great deal on severance taxes on oil, gas, and mineral production for revenue, most states get a relatively small amount of their revenue from such sources.The practice of energy law has been the domain of law firms working on behalf of utility companies, rather than legal scholars or other legal actors (such as private lawyers and paralegals), especially in Texas, but this is changing.  Some officials from energy agencies may take jobs in the utilities or other companies they regulate, such as the former FERC chairman did in 2008.The American Bar Association (ABA) has a Section of Environment, Energy, and Resources, which is a \"forum for lawyers working in areas related to environmental law, natural resources law, and energy law.\"  The Section houses several substantive committees on environmental and energy law that release current information on topics of interest to practitioners and news of committee activities. The ABA recognized 'environmental and energy law' as one of the practice areas where legal work may be found in 2009.\nPatricia Peck Gossel (1944 \u2014 June 12, 2004) was an American science historian and curator, who chaired the Science, Medicine and Society Division at the Smithsonian's National Museum of American History.\nThe Riksdag (Swedish: riksdagen or Sveriges riksdag) is the national legislature and the supreme decision-making body of Sweden. Since 1971, the Riksdag has been a unicameral legislature with 349 members (riksdagsledam\u00f6ter), elected proportionally and serving, from 1994 onwards, on fixed four-year terms.The constitutional functions of the Riksdag are enumerated in the Instrument of Government (Regeringsformen), and its internal workings are specified in greater detail in the Riksdag Act (Riksdagsordningen).The seat of the Riksdag is at Parliament House (Swedish: Riksdagshuset), on the island of Helgeandsholmen in the central parts of Stockholm. The Riksdag has its institutional roots in the feudal Riksdag of the Estates, by tradition thought to have first assembled in Arboga in 1435, and in 1866 following reforms of the 1809 Instrument of Government that body was transformed into a bicameral legislature with an upper chamber (F\u00f6rsta Kammaren) and a lower chamber (Andra Kammaren).The most recent general election was held on 9 September 2018.\n", "path": ["ferdinand rothbart", "Germany", "Europe", "Sweden", "the riksdag"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the replaces of the country location of liberty arming the patriot?", "correct_answer": "the thirteen colonies", "model_answer": " [/INST] The Liberty Arming the Patriot sculpture is located in Pawtucket, Rhode Island, in the United States of America. Pawtucket is a city in the state of Rhode Island, which is one of the 50 states", "context": "The Thirteen Colonies, also known as the Thirteen British Colonies or the Thirteen American Colonies, were a group of colonies of Great Britain on the Atlantic coast of America founded in the 17th and 18th centuries which declared independence in 1776 and formed the United States of America. The Thirteen Colonies had very similar political, constitutional, and legal systems and were dominated by Protestant English-speakers. They were part of Britain's possessions in the New World, which also included colonies in Canada, the Caribbean, and Florida.Between 1625 and 1775, the colonial population grew from roughly 2,000 to 2.4 million, displacing American Indians. This population included people subject to a system of slavery which was legal in all of the colonies prior to the American Revolutionary War. In the 18th century, the British government operated its colonies under a policy of mercantilism, in which the central government administered its possessions for the economic benefit of the mother country. The Thirteen Colonies had a high degree of self-governance and active local elections, and they resisted London's demands for more control. The French and Indian War (1754\u201363) against France and its Indian allies led to growing tensions between Britain and the Thirteen Colonies. In the 1750s, the colonies began collaborating with one another instead of dealing directly with Britain. These inter-colonial activities cultivated a sense of shared American identity and led to calls for protection of the colonists' \"Rights as Englishmen\", especially the principle of \"no taxation without representation\". Grievances with the British government led to the American Revolution, in which the colonies collaborated in forming the Continental Congress. The colonists fought the American Revolutionary War (1775\u201383) with the aid of France and, to a significantly smaller degree, the Dutch Republic and Spain.\nBrigadier Dame Cecilie Monica Golding,  (n\u00e9e Johnson; 6 August 1902 \u2013 6 June 1997) was a British Army nurse and nursing administrator who rose to Colonel Commandant, Matron-in-Chief and Director of the Queen Alexandra's Royal Army Nursing Corps (QARANC).\nUnited Nations Security Council Resolution 1956, adopted unanimously on December 15, 2010, after recognising positive developments in Iraq since the adoption of 661 (1990), the Council terminated UN supervised arrangements for the Development Fund for Iraq with effect from June 30, 2011.Resolution 1956, along with resolutions 1957 (2010) and 1958 (2010), ended some major restrictions placed on Iraq. However, demands that Iraq resolve disputes with Kuwait remained. The high-level meeting was chaired by United States Vice President Joe Biden.\nPorocara is a genus of beetles in the family Carabidae, containing the following species:Porocara glabrata BaehrPorocara nigricollis BaehrPorocara occidentalis BaehrPorocara punctata SloanePorocara ulrichi Baehr\nThe United States of America (USA), commonly known as the United States (U.S. or US) or America, is a country comprising 50 states, a federal district, five major self-governing territories, and various possessions. At 3.8 million sq mi (9.8 million km2), the United States is the world's third or fourth largest country by total area and is slightly smaller than the entire continent of Europe's 3.93 million sq mi (10.2 million km2). With a population of more than 327 million people, the U.S. is the third most populous country. Most of the country is located contiguously in North America between Canada and Mexico. The extremely diverse geography, climate, and wildlife of the United States make it one of the world's 17 megadiverse countries.Paleo-Indians migrated from Siberia to the North American mainland at least 12,000 years ago. European colonization began in the 16th century. The United States emerged from the thirteen British colonies established along the East Coast. Following the French and Indian War, numerous disputes between Great Britain and the colonies led to the American Revolution, which began in 1775, and the subsequent Declaration of Independence in 1776. The war ended in 1783 with the United States becoming the first country to gain independence from a European power. The current constitution was adopted in 1788, with the first ten amendments, collectively named the Bill of Rights, being ratified in 1791 to guarantee many fundamental civil liberties. The United States embarked on a vigorous expansion across North America throughout the 19th century, acquiring new territories, displacing Native American tribes, and gradually admitting new states until it spanned the continent by 1848.During the second half of the 19th century, the Civil War led to the abolition of slavery. By the end of the century, the United States had extended into the Pacific Ocean, and its economy, driven in large part by the Industrial Revolution, began to soar. The Spanish\u2013American War and World War I confirmed the country's status as a global military power. The United States emerged from World War II as a global superpower and a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council. The end of the Cold War and the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 left the United States as the world's sole superpower.The United States is a federal republic and a representative democracy. It is a founding member of the United Nations, World Bank, International Monetary Fund, Organization of American States (OAS), and many other international organizations. The United States is a highly developed country, with the world's largest economy by nominal GDP and second-largest economy by PPP, accounting for approximately a quarter of global GDP. The U.S. economy is largely post-industrial, characterized by the dominance of services and knowledge-based activities, although the manufacturing sector remains the second-largest in the world. The United States is the world's largest importer and the second largest exporter of goods, by value. Although its population is only 4.3% of the world total, the U.S. holds 31% of the total wealth in the world, the largest share of global wealth concentrated in a single country.Despite income and wealth disparities, the United States continues to rank very high in measures of socioeconomic performance, including average wage, human development, per capita GDP, and worker productivity. The United States is the foremost military power in the world, making up a third of global military spending, and is a leading political, cultural, and scientific force internationally.\nLiberty Arming the Patriot, sometimes called Freedom Arming the Patriot, is a bronze sculpture at Park Place in Pawtucket, Rhode Island, commemorating the participation of the city's citizens in the American Civil War.  It was designed by William Granville Hastings and cast by the Gorham Manufacturing Company in 1897.  Unlike many Civil War memorials, Liberty Arming the Patriot is a dynamic composition, depicting a young farmer setting his plow aside, and reaching to take a sword from a classical female figure clad in breastplate and wielding a pike.  The statue is 11 feet (3.4 m) in height, and is mounted on a granite base 10 feet (3.0 m) high and 22 feet (6.7 m) wide. The sculpture was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 2001.\nYa Magnoon (Arabic: \u064a\u0627 \u0645\u062c\u0646\u0648\u0646\u200e) (Oh you mad) is a 1999 album by the Syrian singer Asalah Nasri.\n", "path": ["liberty arming the patriot", "United States of America", "the thirteen colonies"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the country location of the replaces of the country location of szymankowszczyzna?", "correct_answer": "Russian Empire", "model_answer": " [/INST] The village of Szymankowszczyzna is located in Poland. Szymankowszczyzna is a Polish village, specifically in the administrative district of Gmina Stanis\u0142aw\u00f3w, within Mi\u0144sk County, Masovian", "context": "Poland (Polish: Polska [\u02c8p\u0254lska] (listen)), officially the Republic of Poland (Polish: Rzeczpospolita Polska [\u0290\u025bt\u0361\u0282p\u0254\u02c8sp\u0254lita \u02c8p\u0254lska] (listen)), is a country located in Central Europe. It is divided into 16 administrative subdivisions, covering an area of 312,696 square kilometres (120,733 sq mi), and has a largely temperate seasonal climate. With a population of approximately 38.5 million people, Poland is the sixth most populous member state of the European Union. Poland's capital and largest metropolis is Warsaw. Other major cities include Krak\u00f3w, \u0141\u00f3d\u017a, Wroc\u0142aw, Pozna\u0144, Gda\u0144sk, and Szczecin.Poland is bordered by the Baltic Sea, Lithuania, and Russia's Kaliningrad Oblast to the north, Belarus and Ukraine to the east, Slovakia and the Czech Republic to the south, and Germany to the west.The establishment of the Polish state can be traced back to AD 966, when Mieszko I, ruler of the realm coextensive with the territory of present-day Poland, converted to Christianity. The Kingdom of Poland was founded in 1025, and in 1569 it cemented its longstanding political association with the Grand Duchy of Lithuania by signing the Union of Lublin. This union formed the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth, one of the largest (about 1,000,000 square kilometres (390,000 sq mi)) and most populous countries of 16th and 17th century Europe, with a uniquely liberal political system which adopted Europe's first written national constitution, the Constitution of 3 May 1791.More than a century after the Partitions of Poland at the end of the 18th century, Poland regained its independence in 1918 with the Treaty of Versailles. In September 1939, World War II started with the invasion of Poland by Germany, followed by the Soviet Union invading Poland in accordance with the Molotov\u2013Ribbentrop Pact. More than six million Polish citizens, including 90% of the country's Jews, perished in the war. In 1947, the Polish People's Republic was established as a satellite state under Soviet influence. In the aftermath of the Revolutions of 1989, most notably through the emergence of the Solidarity movement, Poland reestablished itself as a presidential democratic republic.Poland has a developed market and is a regional power in Central Europe, with the largest Stock Exchange in the East-Central European zone. It has the sixth largest economy by GDP (PPP) in the European Union and one of the most dynamic economies in the world, simultaneously achieving a very high rank on the Human Development Index. Poland is a developed country, which maintains a high-income economy along with very high standards of living, life quality, safety, education, and economic freedom. The country has a developed school educational system, and  also provides free university education, state-funded social security, and a universal health care system for all citizens. Poland has 16 UNESCO World Heritage Sites, 15 of which are cultural. Poland is a member state of the European Union, the Schengen Area, the United Nations, NATO, the OECD, the Three Seas Initiative, and the Visegr\u00e1d Group.\nThe Russian Empire was an empire that extended across Eurasia and North America from 1721, following the end of the Great Northern War, until the Republic was proclaimed by the Provisional Government that took power after the February Revolution of 1917.The third largest empire in world history, at its greatest extent stretching over three continents, Europe, Asia, and North America, the Russian Empire was surpassed in size only by the British and Mongol empires. The rise of the Russian Empire coincided with the decline of neighboring rival powers: the Swedish Empire, the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth, Persia and the Ottoman Empire. It played a major role in 1812\u20131814 in defeating Napoleon's ambitions to control Europe and expanded to the west and south.The House of Romanov ruled the Russian Empire from 1721 until 1762, and its matrilineal branch of patrilineal German descent the House of Holstein-Gottorp-Romanov ruled from 1762. At the beginning of the 19th century, the Russian Empire extended from the Arctic Ocean in the north to the Black Sea in the south, from the Baltic Sea on the west to the Pacific Ocean, into Alaska and Northern California in  America on the east. With 125.6 million subjects registered by the 1897 census, it had the third-largest population in the world at the time, after Qing China and India. Like all empires, it featured great diversity in terms of economies, ethnicity, and religion. There were many dissident elements, who launched numerous rebellions and assassination attempts; they were closely watched by the secret police, with thousands exiled to Siberia.Economically, the empire had a predominantly agricultural base, with low productivity on large estates worked by serfs (Russian peasants) until they were freed in 1861. The economy slowly industrialized with the help of foreign investments in railways and factories. The land was ruled by a nobility, the boyars, from the 10th through the 17th centuries, and subsequently by an emperor. Tsar Ivan III (1462\u20131505) laid the groundwork for the empire that later emerged. He tripled the territory of his state, ended the dominance of the Golden Horde, renovated the Moscow Kremlin, and laid the foundations of the Russian state. Emperor Peter the Great (1682\u20131725) fought numerous wars and expanded an already huge empire into a major European power. He moved the capital from Moscow to the new model city of St. Petersburg, and led a cultural revolution that replaced some of the traditionalist and medieval social and political mores with a modern, scientific, Europe-oriented, and rationalist system.Empress Catherine the Great (reigned 1762\u20131796) presided over a golden age; she expanded the state by conquest, colonization and diplomacy, continuing Peter the Great's policy of modernization along Western European lines. Emperor Alexander II (1855\u20131881) promoted numerous reforms, most dramatically the emancipation of all 23 million serfs in 1861. His policy in Eastern Europe involved protecting the Orthodox Christians under the rule of the Ottoman Empire. That connection by 1914 led to Russia's entry into the First World War on the side of France, the United Kingdom, and Serbia, against the German, Austrian, and Ottoman empires.The Russian Empire functioned as an absolute monarchy on principles of Orthodoxy, Autocracy, and Nationality until the Revolution of 1905 and then became a de jure constitutional monarchy. The empire collapsed during the February Revolution of 1917, largely as a result of massive failures in its participation in the First World War.\nEsteban Andres Mujica Peralta (born 24 February 1985) is a Chilean male badminton player.\nSzymankowszczyzna [\u0282\u0268ma\u014bk\u0254f\u0282\u02c8t\u0361\u0282\u0268zna] is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Stanis\u0142aw\u00f3w, within Mi\u0144sk County, Masovian Voivodeship, in east-central Poland.\nMiamimyia is a genus of flies in the family Tachinidae.\nCongress Poland or Russian Poland, formally known as the Kingdom of Poland, was a polity created in 1815 by the Congress of Vienna as a sovereign Polish state. Until the November Uprising in 1831, the kingdom was in a personal union with the tsars of Russia. Thereafter, the state was forcibly integrated into the Russian Empire over the course of the 19th century. In 1915, during World War I, it was replaced by the Central Powers with the nominal Regency Kingdom of Poland, which continued to exist until Poland regained independence in 1918. Following the partitions of Poland at the end of the 18th century, Poland ceased to exist as an independent state for 123 years. The territory, with its native population, was split between the Austrian Empire, the Kingdom of Prussia, and the Russian Empire. An equivalent to Congress Poland within the Austrian Empire  was the Kingdom of Galicia and Lodomeria, also commonly referred to as \"Austrian Poland\". The area incorporated into Prussia and subsequently the German Empire had little autonomy and was merely a province within Prussia - the Province of Posen.The Kingdom of Poland enjoyed considerable political autonomy as guaranteed by the liberal constitution. However, its rulers, the Russian Emperors, generally disregarded any restrictions on their power. It was, therefore, little more than a puppet state of the Russian Empire. The autonomy was severely curtailed following uprisings in 1830\u201331 and 1863, as the country became governed by namiestniks, and later divided into guberniya (provinces). Thus from the start, Polish autonomy remained little more than fiction.The capital was located in Warsaw, which towards the beginning of the 20th century became the Russian Empire's third-largest city after St. Petersburg and Moscow. The moderately multicultural population of Congress Poland was estimated at 9,402,253 inhabitants in 1897. It was mostly composed of Poles, Polish Jews, ethnic Germans and a small Russian minority. The predominant religion was Roman Catholicism and the official language used within the state was Polish until the January Uprising when Russian became co-official. Yiddish and German were widely spoken by its native speakers. The territory of Congress Poland roughly corresponds to modern-day Kalisz Region and the Lublin, \u0141\u00f3d\u017a, Masovian, Podlaskie and Holy Cross Voivodeships of Poland as well as southwestern Lithuania and part of Grodno District of Belarus.\nLa Houssoye is a commune in the Oise department in northern France.\n\"Love Trip / Shiawase wo Wakenasai\" (LOVE TRIP/\u3057\u3042\u308f\u305b\u3092\u5206\u3051\u306a\u3055\u3044) is the 45th single by the Japanese idol girl group AKB48. It was released in Japan on August 31, 2016. It was number-one on the Oricon Weekly Singles Chart with 1,177,769 copies sold. The song also reached number-one on the Billboard Japan Hot 100.\n", "path": ["szymankowszczyzna", "Poland", "Congress Poland", "Russian Empire"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the field of this occupation of the occupation of alexander antonovich solodukha?", "correct_answer": "medicine", "model_answer": " [/INST] Answer: Alexander Antonovich Solodukha is a Belarusian singer.\n\nExplanation: According to the context provided, Solodukha is a Belarusian singer who graduated from the Minsk Medical Institute", "context": "A physician, medical practitioner, medical doctor, or simply doctor, is a professional who practises medicine, which is concerned with promoting, maintaining, or restoring health through the study, diagnosis, prognosis and treatment of disease, injury, and other physical and mental impairments. Physicians may focus their practice on certain disease categories, types of patients, and methods of treatment\u2014known as specialities\u2014or they may assume responsibility for the provision of continuing and comprehensive medical care to individuals, families, and communities\u2014known as general practice. Medical practice properly requires both a detailed knowledge of the academic disciplines, such as anatomy and physiology, underlying diseases and their treatment\u2014the science of medicine\u2014and also a decent competence in its applied practice\u2014the art or craft of medicine.Both the role of the physician and the meaning of the word itself vary around the world. Degrees and other qualifications vary widely, but there are some common elements, such as medical ethics requiring that physicians show consideration, compassion, and benevolence for their patients.\nAlexander Antonovich Solodukha (Belorussian \u0410\u043b\u044f\u043a\u0441\u0430\u043d\u0434\u0440 \u0410\u043d\u0442\u043e\u043d\u0430\u0432\u0438\u0447 \u0421\u0430\u043b\u0430\u0434\u0443\u0445\u0430; Born January 18, 1959 in Kamenka, Sergiev Posad district, Moscow region.) - Belarusian singer.In 1982, he graduated from the Minsk Medical Institute. He worked as a doctor and participated in amateur performances.Since 1987 - sings in different pop bands1991 - Alexander starts his solo career, performing in a Band \"Carousel.\" He determines his music style as schlager song. The same year he earned the nickname \"Merry Milkman\".He takes part in television and radio broadcasts, concerts in the CIS countries.Solodukha names Valery Leontiev and Stas Mikhaylov as singers who influenced him.In 1995, Alexander Solodukha comes to Russia to record his first album, \"Hello, some strangers' sweetheart.\" The co-named song (a remake of the soviet song) has become the absolute hit of the performer. By the present moment, the performed has released 4 albums.At the National Music Awards 2012 presented by the Ministry of Culture of the Republic of Belarus and the CTV TV-channel, Solodukha was honored in the category of \u201cBest tour in Belarus.\u201d\nWard No. 1 Dhaka South City Corporation (Bengali: \u0993\u09af\u09bc\u09be\u09b0\u09cd\u09a1 \u09a8\u0982 \u09e7, \u09a2\u09be\u0995\u09be \u09a6\u0995\u09cd\u09b7\u09bf\u09a3 \u09b8\u09bf\u099f\u09bf \u0995\u09b0\u09cd\u09aa\u09cb\u09b0\u09c7\u09b6\u09a8) is an administrative division of Dhaka South City Corporation in zone 1, which formally known as ward no. 24 of Dhaka City Corporation. It's located in Khilgaon police station of Dhaka City. It forms a city corporation council electoral constituency and is a part of Bangladesh Jatiyo Sangshad constituency Dhaka-9.\nEdeirnion or Edeyrnion is an area of the county of Denbighshire and an ancient commote of medieval Wales in the cantref of Penllyn.  According to tradition, it was named after its eponymous founder Edern or Edeyrn. It was included as a Welsh territory of Shropshire in the Domesday Book.Edeirnion was nominally a part of the Kingdom of Powys but was often subject to border intrusions by the neighbouring Kingdom of Gwynedd. It was the patrimony of Owain Brogyntyn. These rumbling border disputes caused a great deal of friction between the two realms. Edeirnion was occupied and annexed by Gwynedd in the reign of Llywelyn the Great but briefly returned to Powys following a treaty forced on Gwynedd by England after Llywelyn's death in 1240. The territory was again occupied by Gwynedd after 1267 before being returned again to Powys. This continuing dispute and the appeal by Llywelyn ap Gruffudd to Edward I of England to see the resolution of this dispute settled by Welsh Law was one of the reasons the principalities in the north of Wales were unable to unite in opposition to English hegemony and was a contributing factor to the final war between the Principality of Wales and England, which ultimately saw the end of Welsh independence.  Edeirnion still exists as a bro, or region, in Denbighshire, located around Corwen and near the Berwyn Range.\nMedicine is the science and practice of establishing the diagnosis, prognosis, treatment, and prevention of disease. Medicine encompasses a variety of health care practices evolved to maintain and restore health by the prevention and treatment of illness. Contemporary medicine applies biomedical sciences, biomedical research, genetics, and medical technology to diagnose, treat, and prevent injury and disease, typically through pharmaceuticals or surgery, but also through therapies as diverse as psychotherapy, external splints and traction, medical devices, biologics, and ionizing radiation, amongst others.Medicine has been around for thousands of years, during most of which it was an art (an area of skill and knowledge) frequently having connections to the religious and philosophical beliefs of local culture. For example, a medicine man would apply herbs and say prayers for healing, or an ancient philosopher and physician would apply bloodletting according to the theories of humorism. In recent centuries, since the advent of modern science, most medicine has become a combination of art and science (both basic and applied, under the umbrella of medical science). While stitching technique for sutures is an art learned through practice, the knowledge of what happens at the cellular and molecular level in the tissues being stitched arises through science.Prescientific forms of medicine are now known as traditional medicine and folk medicine, though they do not fall within the modern definition of \u201cmedicine\u201d which is based in medical science. Traditional medicine and folk medicine remain commonly used with, or instead of, scientific medicine and are thus called alternative medicine (meaning \u201c[something] other than medicine\u201d, from Latin alter, \u201cother\u201d). For example, evidence on the effectiveness of acupuncture is \"variable and inconsistent\" for any condition, but is generally safe when done by an appropriately trained practitioner. In contrast, alternative treatments outside the bounds not just of scientific medicine, but also outside the bounds of safety and efficacy are termed quackery.  Quackery can encompass an array of practices and practitioners, irrespective of whether they are prescientific (traditional medicine and folk medicine) or modern pseudo-scientific, including chiropractic which rejects modern scientific germ theory of disease (instead believing without evidence that human diseases are caused by invisible subluxation of the bones, predominately of the spine and less so of other bones), with just over half of chiropractors also rejecting the science of immunization.\nWisarut Pannasri (Thai: \u0e27\u0e34\u0e28\u0e23\u0e38\u0e15 \u0e1e\u0e31\u0e19\u0e19\u0e32\u0e2a\u0e35; born June 13, 1982) is a Thai retired professional footballer who plays as a Left Back.\nCarlos C\u00e9sar Matheus or simply Carlinhos (born August 2, 1984 in Taquaritinga), is a Brazilian defensive midfielder who currently plays for Bragantino. He spent most of his career in Brazil, playing for Am\u00e9rica-SP, S\u00e3o Paulo, Guarani and Figueirense before, in January 2010, moving to Greek Superleague club Iraklis.\n", "path": ["alexander antonovich solodukha", "physician", "medicine"]}
