{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the child astronomical body of the located on terrain feature of the lowest point of the country location of toamasina airport?", "correct_answer": "Moon", "model_answer": " [/INST] The context does not provide information about a child astronomical body located at the lowest point of the country, Toamasina, and near Toamasina Airport. The information given in the context primarily pertains to rugby union in England, Madagasc", "context": "The 1993\u201394 English Premiership, known at the time as the 1993\u201394 Courage League was the seventh season of competitive rugby union in England. Each team played each other twice, in a round robin system. Bath were the champions, beating Leicester Tigers by six points. Newcastle Gosforth and London Irish were relegated.\nToamasina Airport is an airport in Toamasina, Atsinanana Region, Madagascar (IATA: TMM, ICAO: FMMT).\nShara Nova (previously Worden) is the lead singer and songwriter for My Brightest Diamond. As a composer she is most recognized for her choral compositions and the baroque chamber opera \"You Us We All\".  New music composers Sarah Kirkland Snider, David Lang, Steve Mackey and Bryce Dessner have composed pieces for Nova's voice.  She has recorded as a guest vocalist with David Byrne, Laurie Anderson, The Decemberists, Sufjan Stevens, Jedi Mind Tricks, The Blind Boys of Alabama and Stateless as well as extensive collaborations with visual artists Matthew Ritchie and Matthew Barney.  She was formerly the frontwoman of AwRY. On March 3, 2016 Shara legally changed her last name from Worden to Nova after divorcing her husband, to whom she had been married most of her adult life.\nEvents in the year 2017 in the United Arab Emirates.\nThe Indian Ocean is the third-largest of the world's oceanic divisions, covering 70,560,000 km2 (27,240,000 sq mi) (19.8% of the water on the Earth's surface). It is bounded by Asia on the north, on the west by Africa, on the east by Australia, and on the south by the Southern Ocean or, depending on definition, by Antarctica.Scientifically, the Indian Ocean remained poorly explored before the International Indian Ocean Expedition in the early 1960s.  The Challenger expedition 1872\u20131876 only reported from south of the polar front.  The Valdivia expedition 1898\u20131899 made deep samples in the Indian Ocean.  In the 1930s, the John Murray Expedition mainly studied shallow-water habitats.  The Swedish Deep Sea Expedition 1947\u20131948 also sampled the Indian Ocean on its global tour and the Danish Galathea sampled deep-water fauna from Sri Lanka to South Africa on its second expedition 1950\u20131952.  The Soviet research vessel Vityaz also did research in the Indian Ocean.\nEarth is the third planet from the Sun and the only astronomical object known to harbor life. According to radiometric dating and other sources of evidence, Earth formed over 4.5 billion years ago. Earth's gravity interacts with other objects in space, especially the Sun and the Moon, Earth's only natural satellite. Earth orbits around the Sun in 365.26 days, a period known as an Earth year. During this time, Earth rotates about its axis about 366.26 times.Earth's axis of rotation is tilted with respect to its orbital plane, producing seasons on Earth. The gravitational interaction between Earth and the Moon causes tides, stabilizes Earth's orientation on its axis and gradually slows its rotation. Earth is the densest planet in the Solar System and the largest and most massive of the four terrestrial planets.Earth's lithosphere is divided into several rigid tectonic plates that migrate across the surface over many millions of years. About 71% of Earth's surface is covered with water, mostly by oceans. The remaining 29% is land consisting of continents and islands that together contain many lakes, rivers and other sources of water that contribute to the hydrosphere. The majority of Earth's polar regions are covered in ice, including the Antarctic ice sheet and the sea ice of the Arctic ice pack. Earth's interior remains active with a solid iron inner core, a liquid outer core that generates the Earth's magnetic field and a convecting mantle that drives plate tectonics.Within the first billion years of Earth's history, life appeared in the oceans and began to affect the Earth's atmosphere and surface, leading to the proliferation of anaerobic and, later, aerobic organisms. Some geological evidence indicates that life may have arisen as early as 4.1 billion years ago. Since then, the combination of Earth's distance from the Sun, physical properties and geological history have allowed life to evolve and thrive. In the history of life on Earth, biodiversity has gone through long periods of expansion, occasionally punctuated by mass extinction events. Over 99% of all species that ever lived on Earth are extinct. Estimates of the number of species on Earth today vary widely; most species have not been described. Over 7.6 billion humans live on Earth and depend on its biosphere and natural resources for their survival. Humans have developed diverse societies and cultures; politically, the world has around 200 sovereign states.\nSaint Vicente Liem de la Paz (Vietnamese: Vinh S\u01a1n Ph\u1ea1m Hi\u1ebfu Li\u00eam) (1732 \u2013 November 7, 1773) was a Tonkinese (present day northern Vietnam) Dominican friar venerated as a saint and martyr by the Roman Catholic Church.He was born Ph\u1ea1m Hi\u1ebfu Li\u00eam at Tr\u00e0 L\u0169 village, in the ph\u1ee7 of Thi\u00ean Tr\u01b0\u1eddng, Nam \u0110\u1ecbnh Province, Tonkin in 1732 to Christian parents, Antonio and Monica Daeon de la Cruz, members of the Tonkinese nobility. When he fell gravely ill several days after his birth, he was baptized by Fr. Chien de Santo Tomas, taking the name of Vicente Liem. Since Tr\u00e0 L\u0169 was one of those Tonkinese villages where Dominican friars preached the Catholic faith, Li\u00eam grew up to be a Christian. He was later brought by his parents to a missionary center where he learned catechism.In 1738, King Philip V of Spain opened the Colegio de San Juan de Letran and the University of Santo Tomas (UST) in the Philippines to Chinese and Tonkinese students, since China and Tonkin did not have Christian educational institutions. The Dominican fathers decided to let Li\u00eam and four other Tonkinese (Jose de Santo Tomas, Juan de Santo Domingo, Pedro Martir and Pedro de San Jacinto) study in the Philippines.Vicente took the trivium and the quadrivium in Colegio de San Juan de Letran, now the equivalent of elementary and secondary education. He finished a degree of lector of humanities at Letran. He continued his collegiate education at the University of Santo Tomas while residing at Letran. In September 1753, after completing his studies at Letran, he entered the Dominican order, along with his three Tonkinese companions. A year later, they made their solemn professions. On January 28, 1755, he received the tonsure and minor orders at the Church of Sta. Ana. In 1758 Li\u00eam was ordained priest under the Dominican order. On September of that year, he passed the examinations to hear confessions. On October 3, he started his journey back to Tonkin. He arrived on January 20, 1759.He spent time at Tonkin on evangelizing the Tonkinese people. However the Tonkinese authorities did not agree with this. On October 2, 1773, he and his two assistants were arrested at \"Co Dou\". He and his assistants were beaten up, after which they traveled on foot to the village of recorded as \"Dou Hoi.\" There he met another Dominican priest, the Spaniard Jacinto Casta\u00f1eda. They were presented to the Vice Governor and to the Royal Minister. They were thrown to a cage for a night. The arrival of a High Minister prompted their transfer to Kien Nam, where the King held his court. While under detention, they still managed to preach Catholicism to the people. Later they were taken to Tan Cau, then to the house of Canh Thuy. Finally they were brought to the King where they were tried. Their trial led for the King to be angry and they were thrown to jail. After several days, the King brought down the guilty verdict with the penalty of beheading. The execution occurred on November 7, 1773. After the execution, the Christians who were present at the site carried away the bodies of de la Paz and Casta\u00f1eda, where they were laid to rest at the town of Trung Linh in Xuan Truong, Nam \u0110\u1ecbnh. Several more Christian missionaries were put to death by the Tonkinese authorities.The process of beatification of de la Paz and Caste\u00f1eda, as well as other Dominican martyrs, was initiated through Vicar Apostolic Bishop Ignacio Delgado, O.P. They were beatified by Pope Pius X with his feast day on November 6. Pope John Paul II announced the canonization of de la Paz on June 19, 1988, with his feast day on November 24.\nMadagascar (; Malagasy: Madagasikara), officially the Republic of Madagascar (Malagasy: Repoblikan'i Madagasikara Malagasy pronunciation: [republi\u02c8k\u02b2an mada\u0261as\u02c8k\u02b2ar\u0259\u0325]; French: R\u00e9publique de Madagascar), and previously known as the Malagasy Republic, is an island country in the Indian Ocean, approximately 400 kilometres (250 miles) off the coast of East Africa. The nation comprises the island of Madagascar (the fourth-largest island in the world) and numerous smaller peripheral islands. Following the prehistoric breakup of the supercontinent Gondwana, Madagascar split from the Indian subcontinent around 88 million years ago, allowing native plants and animals to evolve in relative isolation. Consequently, Madagascar is a biodiversity hotspot; over 90% of its wildlife is found nowhere else on Earth. The island's diverse ecosystems and unique wildlife are threatened by the encroachment of the rapidly growing human population and other environmental threats.The archaeological evidence of the earliest human foraging on Madagascar may date up to 10,000 years ago. Human settlement of Madagascar occurred between 350 BC and 550 AD by Austronesian peoples, arriving on outrigger canoes from Borneo. These were joined around the 9th century AD by Bantu migrants crossing the Mozambique Channel from East Africa. Other groups continued to settle on Madagascar over time, each one making lasting contributions to Malagasy cultural life. The Malagasy ethnic group is often divided into 18 or more subgroups, of which the largest are the Merina of the central highlands.Until the late 18th century, the island of Madagascar was ruled by a fragmented assortment of shifting sociopolitical alliances. Beginning in the early 19th century, most of the island was united and ruled as the Kingdom of Madagascar by a series of Merina nobles. The monarchy ended in 1897 when the island was absorbed into the French colonial empire, from which the island gained independence in 1960. The autonomous state of Madagascar has since undergone four major constitutional periods, termed republics. Since 1992, the nation has officially been governed as a constitutional democracy from its capital at Antananarivo. However, in a popular uprising in 2009, president Marc Ravalomanana was made to resign and presidential power was transferred in March 2009 to Andry Rajoelina. Constitutional governance was restored in January 2014, when Hery Rajaonarimampianina was named president following a 2013 election deemed fair and transparent by the international community. Madagascar is a member of the United Nations, the African Union (AU), the Southern African Development Community (SADC), and the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie.Madagascar belongs to the group of least developed countries, according to the United Nations. Malagasy and French are both official languages of the state. The majority of the population adheres to traditional beliefs, Christianity, or an amalgamation of both. Ecotourism and agriculture, paired with greater investments in education, health, and private enterprise, are key elements of Madagascar's development strategy. Under Ravalomanana, these investments produced substantial economic growth, but the benefits were not evenly spread throughout the population, producing tensions over the increasing cost of living and declining living standards among the poor and some segments of the middle class. As of 2017, the economy has been weakened by the 2009\u20132013 political crisis, and quality of life remains low for the majority of the Malagasy population.\nMoon is a 2009 science fiction film directed by Duncan Jones and written by Nathan Parker from a story by Jones. The film follows Sam Bell (Sam Rockwell), a man who experiences a personal crisis as he nears the end of a three-year solitary stint mining helium-3 on the far side of the Moon. It was the feature debut of director Duncan Jones. Kevin Spacey voices Sam's robot companion, GERTY. Moon premiered at the 2009 Sundance Film Festival and was released in selected cinemas in New York and Los Angeles on 12 June 2009. The release was expanded to additional theatres in the United States on 10 July and to the United Kingdom on 17 July.Moon was modestly budgeted and grossed just under $10 million worldwide but was well-received by critics. Rockwell's performance found praise as did the film's scientific realism and plausibility. It won numerous film critic and film festival awards and was nominated for the BAFTA Award for Best British Film.\n", "path": ["toamasina airport", "Madagascar", "Indian Ocean", "third planet", "Moon"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the country location of origin of the continent of the country location of citizenship of hans-wilhelm koepcke?", "correct_answer": "Sweden", "model_answer": " [/INST] Hans-Wilhelm Koepcke was a zoologist, ornithologist, and herpetologist born in Saatzig, which is located in the German Empire (now Germany). Therefore, he was born in the European country", "context": "Hans-Wilhelm Koepcke (13 June 1914 in Saatzig, German Empire \u2013 21 November 2000 in Hamburg, Germany) was a zoologist, ornithologist, and herpetologist. He was married to ornithologist Maria Koepcke, and was the father of mammalogist Juliane Koepcke.\nEurope is a Swedish rock band formed in Upplands V\u00e4sby in 1979,  by vocalist Joey Tempest, guitarist John Norum, bassist Peter Olsson, and drummer Tony Reno. They got a major breakthrough in Sweden in 1982 by winning the televised competition \"Rock-SM\" (Swedish Rock Championships): it was the first time this competition was held, and Europe became a larger success than the competition itself.Since their formation, Europe has released eleven studio albums, three live albums, three compilations and twenty-four music videos.Europe rose to international fame in the 1980s with their third album, 1986's The Final Countdown, which has sold over 3 million copies in the United States and 15 million copies worldwide (including album and single). Europe have sold over 25 million records worldwide.  The band has had two top 20 albums on the Billboard 200 chart (The Final Countdown  and Out of This World) and three top 30 singles on the Billboard Hot 100 chart (\"The Final Countdown\", \"Rock the Night\" and \"Carrie\").Europe went on hiatus in 1992, reunited temporarily for a one-off performance in Stockholm on New Year's Eve 1999 and announced an official reunion in 2003. Since then the band has released six albums, Start from the Dark (2004), Secret Society (2006), Last Look at Eden (2009), Bag of Bones (2012), War of Kings (2015) and Walk the Earth (2017).Europe has achieved new attention in the US due to being featured in a GEICO Insurance cable television commercial campaign viewed for many months across the US in 2015\u201316.The band is mainly influenced by Whitesnake, Deep Purple, Rainbow, Led Zeppelin, Thin Lizzy, UFO and Michael Schenker Group.\nThomas Benedict, Sr. (1617 \u2013 February 28, 1689) was an early settler in colonial New York, and Connecticut. He was a member of the General Court of the Colony of Connecticut from Norwalk in the sessions of May 1670, and May 1675.\nSweden (Swedish: Sverige [\u02c8sv\u00e6rj\u025b] (listen)), formal name: the Kingdom of Sweden (Swedish: Konungariket Sverige ), is a Scandinavian Nordic country in Northern Europe. It borders Norway to the west and north and Finland to the east, and is connected to Denmark in the southwest by a bridge-tunnel across the \u00d6resund, a strait at the Swedish-Danish border. At 450,295 square kilometres (173,860 sq mi), Sweden is the largest country in Northern Europe, the third-largest country in the European Union and the fifth largest country in Europe by area. Sweden has a total population of 10.3 million of which 2.5 million have a foreign background. It has a low population density of 22 inhabitants per square kilometre (57/sq mi). The highest concentration is in the central and southern half of the country.Sweden is part of the geographical area of Fennoscandia. The climate is in general very mild for its northerly latitude due to significant maritime influence. In spite of the high latitude, Sweden often has warm continental summers, being located in between the North Atlantic, the Baltic Sea and the vast Eurasian Russian landmass. The general climate and environment varies significantly from the south and north due to the vast latitudal difference and much of Sweden has reliably cold and snowy winters. It also has a vast coastline with many offshore islands, many lakes, a large proportion of the country covered by forests and includes a portion of the Scandinavian Mountains.Germanic peoples have inhabited Sweden since prehistoric times, emerging into history as the Geats (Swedish G\u00f6tar) and Swedes (Svear) and constituting the sea peoples known as the Norsemen. Southern Sweden is predominantly agricultural, while the north is heavily forested.  Today,  the sovereign state of Sweden is a constitutional monarchy and parliamentary democracy, with a monarch as head of state, like its neighbour Norway. The capital city is Stockholm, which is also the most populous city in the country. Legislative power is vested in the 349-member unicameral Riksdag. Executive power is exercised by the government chaired by the prime minister. Sweden is a unitary state, currently divided into 21 counties and 290 municipalities.An independent Swedish state emerged during the early 12th century. After the Black Death in the middle of the 14th century killed about a third of the Scandinavian population, the Hanseatic League threatened Scandinavia's culture, finances and languages. This led to the forming of the Scandinavian Kalmar Union in 1397, which Sweden left in 1523. When Sweden became involved in the Thirty Years War on the Reformist side, an expansion of its territories began and eventually the Swedish Empire was formed. This became one of the great powers of Europe until the early 18th century. Swedish territories outside the Scandinavian Peninsula were gradually lost during the 18th and 19th centuries, ending with the annexation of present-day Finland by Russia in 1809. The last war in which Sweden was directly involved was in 1814, when Norway was militarily forced into personal union. Since then, Sweden has been at peace, maintaining an official policy of neutrality in foreign affairs. The union with Norway was peacefully dissolved in 1905. Sweden was formally neutral through both world wars and the Cold War, albeit Sweden has since 2009 openly moved towards cooperation with NATO. Sweden has close relations to its Nordic neighbours, including linguistically, with the Swedish language being an official language in Finland and Swedish also being mutually intelligible with Danish and Norwegian.After the end of the Cold War, Sweden joined the European Union (EU) on 1 January 1995, but declined NATO membership, as well as Eurozone (EZ) membership following a referendum. It is also a member of the United Nations, the Nordic Council, the Council of Europe, the World Trade Organization and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). Sweden maintains a Nordic social welfare system that provides universal health care and tertiary education for its citizens. It has the world's eleventh-highest per capita income and ranks highly in numerous metrics of national performance, including quality of life, health, education, protection of civil liberties, economic competitiveness, equality, prosperity and human development.\nThe Dean Forest Act 1861 (24 & 25 Vict c 40) is an Act of the Parliament of the United Kingdom. It is a public general Act. It was omitted from the third revised edition of the statutes because of its local and personal nature.This Act was partly in force in Great Britain at the end of 2010.The preamble and sections 2 and 5 and 6 and 17 and 22 and 27 were repealed by section 1 of, and Part VII of the Schedule to, the Statute Law (Repeals) Act 1969. These provisions had been agreed by the Forestry Commission to be obsolete, spent, unnecessary or superseded.\nCarex bicknellii, known as Bicknell's sedge and copper-shouldered oval sedge, is a species of sedge native to North America. Carex bicknellii grows in small clumps with fewer than 25 flowering stems per clump. It is found in mesic to dry prairies, savannas, and open woodlands.\nAbraham Nava Valay (born 23 January 1964 in Mexico City) is a retired Mexican football defender. He obtained a total number of nine caps and no goals for the Mexico national team between 1991 and 1993, and was a squad member at the 1993 Copa Am\u00e9rica.\nGermany (German: Deutschland, German pronunciation: [\u02c8d\u0254\u028ft\u0283lant]), officially the Federal Republic of Germany (German: Bundesrepublik Deutschland, listen ), is a country in Central and Western Europe, lying between the Baltic and North Seas to the north and the Alps, Lake Constance and the High Rhine to the south. It borders Denmark to the north, Poland and the Czech Republic to the east, Austria and Switzerland to the south, France to the southwest, and Luxembourg, Belgium and the Netherlands to the west.Germany includes 16 constituent states, covers an area of 357,386 square kilometres (137,988 sq mi), and has a largely temperate seasonal climate. With 83 million inhabitants, it is the second most populous state of Europe after Russia, the most populous state lying entirely in Europe, as well as the most populous member state of the European Union. Germany is a very decentralised country. Its capital and largest metropolis is Berlin, while Frankfurt serves as its financial capital and has the country's busiest airport. Germany's largest urban area is the Ruhr, with its main centres of Dortmund and Essen. The country's other major cities are Hamburg, Munich, Cologne, Stuttgart, D\u00fcsseldorf, Leipzig, Bremen, Dresden, Hanover, and Nuremberg.Various Germanic tribes have inhabited the northern parts of modern Germany since classical antiquity. A region named Germania was documented before AD 100. During the Migration Period, the Germanic tribes expanded southward. Beginning in the 10th century, German territories formed a central part of the Holy Roman Empire. During the 16th century, northern German regions became the centre of the Protestant Reformation. After the collapse of the Holy Roman Empire, the German Confederation was formed in 1815. The German revolutions of 1848\u201349 resulted in the Frankfurt Parliament establishing major democratic rights.In 1871, Germany became a nation state when most of the German states unified (except Switzerland and Austria) into the Prussian-dominated German Empire. After World War I and the revolution of 1918\u201319, the Empire was replaced by the parliamentary Weimar Republic. The Nazi seizure of power in 1933 led to the establishment of a dictatorship, the annexation of Austria, World War II, and the Holocaust. After the end of World War II in Europe and a period of Allied occupation, Austria was re-established as an independent country and two new German states were founded: West Germany, formed from the American, British, and French occupation zones, and East Germany, formed from the Soviet occupation zone. About a quarter of Germany's pre-war territory was annexed by Poland and the Soviet Union leading to the expulsion of Germans. Following the Revolutions of 1989 that ended communist rule in Central and Eastern Europe, the country was reunified on 3 October 1990.Today, the sovereign state of Germany is a federal parliamentary republic led by a chancellor. It is a great power with a strong economy; it has the world's fourth-largest economy by nominal GDP, and the fifth-largest by PPP. As a global leader in several industrial and technological sectors, it is both the world's third-largest exporter and importer of goods. As a highly developed country with a very high standard of living, it upholds a social security and universal health care system, environmental protection, and a tuition-free university education.The Federal Republic of Germany was a founding member of the European Economic Community in 1957 and the European Union in 1993. It is part of the Schengen Area and became a co-founder of the Eurozone in 1999. Germany is a member of the United Nations, NATO, the G7, the G20, and the OECD. Known for its rich cultural history, Germany has been continuously the home of influential and successful artists, philosophers, writers, musicians, film people, sportspeople, entrepreneurs, scientists, engineers, and inventors. Germany has a large number of World Heritage sites and is among the top tourism destinations in the world.\n", "path": ["hans-wilhelm koepcke", "Germany", "Europe", "Sweden"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the located in the administrative terroritorial entity of the shares border with of the lowest point of the country location of giulvaz?", "correct_answer": "trabzon province", "model_answer": " [/INST] The lowest point of Romania is in the Danube Delta, which is located in the administrative territorial entity of Tulcea County. Giulvaz, however, is a commune in Timi\u0219 County in western Romania, bord", "context": "Giulv\u0103z (Hungarian: Toront\u00e1lgy\u00fclv\u00e9sz; Serbian: \u0402\u0443\u043b\u0432\u0435\u0437; German: Djulwes) is a commune in Timi\u0219 County, Romania. It is composed of four villages: Crai Nou (Bels\u0151major), Giulv\u0103z, Ivanda (Iv\u00e1nd; \u0418\u0432\u0430\u043d\u0434\u0430) and Rudna (Rudna; \u0420\u0443\u0434\u043d\u0430).\nTrabzon (Turkish pronunciation: [\u02c8t\u027eabzon]), historically known as Trebizond, is a city on the Black Sea coast of northeastern Turkey and the capital of Trabzon Province. Trabzon, located on the historical Silk Road, became a melting pot of religions, languages and culture for centuries and a trade gateway to Persia in the southeast and the Caucasus to the northeast. The Venetian and Genoese merchants paid visits to Trebizond during the medieval period and sold silk, linen and woolen fabric.Both republics had merchant colonies within the city \u2013 Leonkastron and the former 'Venetian castle \u2013 that played a role to Trebizond similar to the one Galata played to Constantinople (modern Istanbul). Trabzon formed the basis of several states in its long history and was the capital city of the Empire of Trebizond between 1204 and 1461. During the early modern period, Trabzon, because of the importance of its port, again became a focal point of trade to Persia and the Caucasus.\nTrabzon Province (Turkish: Trabzon ili) is a province of Turkey on the Black Sea coast. Located in a strategically important region, Trabzon is one of the oldest trade port cities in Anatolia.  Neighbouring provinces are Giresun to the west, G\u00fcm\u00fc\u015fhane to the southwest, Bayburt to the southeast and Rize to the east. The provincial capital is Trabzon city, and the traffic code is 61. The major ethnic groups are Turks, but the province is also home to a minority of Muslim Pontic Greek speakers, though younger speakers are not always fluent in this language.\nThomas Coxon (10 June 1883 \u2013 30 January 1942) was an English footballer who played in the Football League for Burslem Port Vale, Stoke, Middlesbrough, Grimsby Town, and Leyton.\nEpimelitta aglaia is a species of beetle in the family Cerambycidae. It was described by Newman in 1840.\nJesper Moller (Danish: M\u00f8ller) is a Danish Animator, Screenwriter and Movie-director. Since beginning his career in animation and the movies in the late 1980s, Jesper Moller has participated in creating a vast number of Danish, European and American animated feature films (see below). After initially working as character animator at Sullivan Bluth Studios under the direction of animation legend Don Bluth, he joined Danish animation studio A. Film A/S in Copenhagen, Denmark. Amassing credits as directing animator, storyboard artist and character designer, he went on to become a central key in establishing A. Film A/S as Europe\u2019s leading feature animation studio and a household name at the majors in the US. After a period as the creative head of Feature Animation, also acting as sequence director on several films, he went on to co-direct (with Stefan Fjeldmark) the 2006 cinema hit Asterix and the Vikings, based on R. Goscinny and A. Uderzo's comic book.Since then, he has been focusing mainly on developing, writing and directing international feature films. (See below)In March 2008, Jesper M\u00f8ller founded Copenhagen-based independent movie company Parka Pictures ApS. In January 2012 veteran German animation producer Lilian Klages joined Parka Pictures as CEO and Executive Producer.\nThe Black Sea is a body of water and marginal sea of the Atlantic Ocean between the Balkans, Eastern Europe, the Caucasus, and Western Asia. It is supplied by a number of major rivers, such as the Danube,  Dnieper, Southern Bug, Dniester, Don, and the  Rioni. Areas of many countries drain into the Black Sea, including Austria, Belarus, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, the Czech Republic, Georgia, Germany, Hungary, Moldova, Poland, Romania, Russia, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Turkey and Ukraine.The Black Sea has an area of 436,400 km2 (168,500 sq mi) (not including the Sea of Azov), a maximum depth of 2,212 m (7,257 ft), and a volume of 547,000 km3 (131,000 cu mi). It is constrained by the Pontic Mountains to the south, Caucasus Mountains to the east, Crimean Mountains to the north, Strandzha to the southwest, Dobrogea Plateau to the northwest, and features a wide shelf to the northwest.The longest east\u2013west extent is about 1,175 km (730 mi).Important cities along the coast include Burgas, Varna, Constan\u021ba, Odessa, Sevastopol, Yalta, Kerch, Gelendzhik, Novorossiysk, Sochi, Sukhumi, Poti, Batumi, Rize, Trabzon, Giresun, Ordu, Samsun, Zonguldak, and Istanbul, .The Black Sea is bordered by Ukraine, Romania, Bulgaria, Turkey, Georgia, and Russia. It has a positive water balance; that is, a net outflow of water 300 km3 (72 cu mi) per year through the Bosphorus and the Dardanelles into the Aegean Sea. There is a two-way hydrological exchange: the more saline and therefore denser, but warmer, Mediterranean water flows into the Black Sea under its less saline outflow. This creates a significant  anoxic layer well below the surface waters. The Black Sea drains into the Mediterranean Sea, via the Aegean Sea and various straits, and is navigable to the Atlantic Ocean. The Bosphorus Strait connects it to the Sea of Marmara, and the Strait of the Dardanelles connects that sea to the Aegean Sea region of the Mediterranean. These waters separate parts of Eastern Europe from the Caucasus and Western Asia. The Black Sea is also connected, to the north, to the Sea of Azov by the Strait of Kerch.The water level has varied significantly over geological time. Due to these variations in the water level in the basin, the surrounding shelf and associated aprons have sometimes been dry land. At certain critical water levels it is possible for connections with surrounding water bodies to become established. It is through the most active of these connective routes, the Turkish Straits, that the Black Sea joins the world ocean. When this hydrological link is not present, the Black Sea is an endorheic basin, operating independently of the global ocean system (like the Caspian Sea for example). Currently, the Black Sea water level is relatively high; thus, water is being exchanged with the Mediterranean. The Turkish Straits connect the Black Sea with the Aegean Sea, and comprise the Bosphorus, the Sea of Marmara and the Dardanelles.\nBulbophyllum pendulum is a species of orchid.\nRomania ( (listen) ro-MAY-nee-\u0259; Romanian: Rom\u00e2nia [rom\u0268\u02c8ni.a]  (listen)) is a country located at the crossroads of Central, Eastern, and Southeastern Europe. It borders the Black Sea to the southeast, Bulgaria to the south, Ukraine to the north, Hungary to the west, Serbia to the southwest, and Moldova to the east. It has a predominantly temperate-continental climate. With a total area of 238,397 square kilometres (92,046 sq mi), Romania is the 12th largest country and also the 7th most populous member state of the European Union, having almost 20 million inhabitants. Its capital and largest city is Bucharest, and other major urban areas include Cluj-Napoca, Timi\u0219oara, Ia\u0219i, Constan\u021ba, Craiova, and Bra\u0219ov.The River Danube, Europe's second-longest river, rises in Germany's Black Forest and flows in a general southeast direction for 2,857 km (1,775 mi), coursing through ten countries before emptying into Romania's Danube Delta. The Carpathian Mountains, which cross Romania from the north to the southwest, include Moldoveanu Peak, at an altitude of 2,544 m (8,346 ft).Modern Romania was formed in 1859 through a personal union of the Danubian Principalities of Moldavia and Wallachia. The new state, officially named Romania since 1866, gained independence from the Ottoman Empire in 1877. Following World War I after declaring its neutrality in 1914, when Romania fought on the side of the Allied powers starting with 1916, Bukovina, Bessarabia, Transylvania as well as parts of Banat, Cri\u0219ana, and Maramure\u0219 became part of the sovereign Kingdom of Romania. In June\u2013August 1940, as a consequence of the Molotov\u2013Ribbentrop Pact and Second Vienna Award, Romania was compelled to cede Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina to the Soviet Union, and Northern Transylvania to Hungary. In November 1940, Romania signed the Tripartite Pact and, consequently, in June 1941 entered World War II on the Axis side, fighting against the Soviet Union until August 1944, when it joined the Allies and recovered Northern Transylvania. Following the war, under the occupation of the Red Army's forces, Romania became a socialist republic and member of the Warsaw Pact. After the 1989 Revolution, Romania began a transition towards democracy and a market economy.Romania ranks 52nd in the Human Development Index, and is a developing country. It has the world's 47th largest economy by nominal GDP and an annual economic growth rate of 7% (2017), the highest in the EU at the time. Following rapid economic growth in the early 2000s, Romania has an economy predominantly based on services, and is a producer and net exporter of machines and electric energy, featuring companies like Automobile Dacia and OMV Petrom. It has been a member of the United Nations since 1955, part of NATO since 2004, and part of the European Union since 2007. An overwhelming majority of the population identifies themselves as Eastern Orthodox Christians and are native speakers of Romanian, a Romance language.\n", "path": ["giulvaz", "Romania", "black sea", "Trabzon", "trabzon province"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the replaces of the indigenous to of the official language of the country location of citizenship of peter tiberio?", "correct_answer": "Kingdom of England", "model_answer": " [/INST] The replacements of the indigenous peoples in terms of the official language of the country where Peter Tiberio is a citizen is English.\n\nExplanation:\nPeter Tiberio is a rugby union player from the United States", "context": "The Kingdom of England (Anglo-Norman and French: Royaume d'Angleterre) was a sovereign state on the island of Great Britain from 927, when it emerged from various Anglo-Saxon kingdoms until 1707, when it united with Scotland to form the Kingdom of Great Britain.On 12 July 927, the various Anglo-Saxon kingdoms were united by \u00c6thelstan (r. 927\u2013939) to form the Kingdom of England. In 1016, the kingdom became part of the North Sea Empire of Cnut the Great, a personal union between England, Denmark and Norway.  The Norman conquest of England in 1066 led to the transfer of the English capital city and chief royal residence from the Anglo-Saxon one at Winchester to Westminster, and the City of London quickly established itself as England's largest and principal commercial centre.Histories of the kingdom of England from the Norman conquest of 1066 conventionally distinguish periods named after successive ruling dynasties: Norman 1066\u20131154, Plantagenet 1154\u20131485, Tudor 1485\u20131603 and Stuart 1603\u20131714 (interrupted by the Interregnum (England) of 1649\u20131660).Dynastically, all English monarchs after 1066 ultimately claim descent from the Normans; the distinction of the Plantagenets is merely conventional, beginning with Henry II (reigned 1154\u20131189) as from that time, the Angevin kings became \"more English in nature\"; the houses of Lancaster and York are both Plantagenet cadet branches, the Tudor dynasty claimed descent from Edward III via John Beaufort and James VI and I of the House of Stuart claimed descent from Henry VII via Margaret Tudor.The completion of the conquest of Wales by Edward I in 1284 put Wales under the control of the English crown. Edward III (reigned 1327\u20131377) transformed the Kingdom of England into one of the most formidable military powers in Europe; his reign also saw vital developments in legislation and government\u2014in particular the evolution of the English parliament.  From the 1340s the kings of England also laid claim to the crown of France, but after the Hundred Years' War and the outbreak of the Wars of the Roses in 1455, the English were no longer in any position to pursue their French claims and lost all their land on the continent, except for Calais. After the turmoils of the Wars of the Roses, the Tudor dynasty ruled during the English Renaissance and again extended English monarchical power beyond England proper, achieving the full union of England and the Principality of Wales in 1542. Henry VIII oversaw the English Reformation, and his daughter Elizabeth I (reigned 1558\u20131603) the Elizabethan Religious Settlement, meanwhile establishing England as a great power and laying the foundations of the British Empire by claiming possessions in the New World.From the accession of James VI and I in 1603, the Stuart dynasty ruled England in personal union with Scotland and Ireland. Under the Stuarts, the kingdom plunged into civil war, which culminated in the execution of Charles I in 1649. The monarchy returned in 1660, but the Civil War had established the precedent that an English monarch cannot govern without the consent of Parliament. This concept became legally established as part of the Glorious Revolution of 1688.From this time the kingdom of England, as well as its successor state the United Kingdom, functioned in effect as a constitutional monarchy. On 1 May 1707, under the terms of the Acts of Union 1707, the kingdoms of England and Scotland united to form the Kingdom of Great Britain.\nEnglish is a West Germanic language that was first spoken in early medieval England and eventually became a global lingua franca. It is named after the Angles, one of the Germanic tribes that migrated to the area of Great Britain that later took their name, as England. Both names derive from Anglia, a peninsula in the Baltic Sea. The language is closely related to Frisian and Low Saxon, and its vocabulary has been significantly influenced by other Germanic languages, particularly Norse (a North Germanic language), and to a greater extent by Latin and French.English has developed over the course of more than 1,400 years. The earliest forms of English, a group of West Germanic (Ingvaeonic) dialects brought to Great Britain by Anglo-Saxon settlers in the 5th century, are collectively called Old English. Middle English began in the late 11th century with the Norman conquest of England; this was a period in which the language was influenced by French. Early Modern English began in the late 15th century with the introduction of the printing press to London, the printing of the King James Bible and the start of the Great Vowel Shift.Through the worldwide influence of the British Empire, and later the United States, Modern English has been spreading around the world since the 17th century. Through all types of printed and electronic media, and spurred by the emergence of the United States as a global superpower, English has become the leading language of international discourse and the lingua franca in many regions and professional contexts such as science, navigation and law.English is the largest language by number of speakers, and the third most-spoken native language in the world, after Standard Chinese and Spanish. It is the most widely learned second language and is either the official language or one of the official languages in almost 60 sovereign states. There are more people who have learned it as a second language than there are native speakers. It is estimated that there are over 2 billion speakers of English. English is the most commonly spoken language in the United Kingdom, the United States, Canada, Australia, Ireland and New Zealand, and it is widely spoken in some areas of the Caribbean, Africa and South Asia. It is a co-official language of the United Nations, the European Union and many other world and regional international organisations. It is the most widely spoken Germanic language, accounting for at least 70% of speakers of this Indo-European branch. English has a vast vocabulary, though counting how many words any language has is impossible. English speakers are called \"Anglophones\".Modern English grammar is the result of a gradual change from a typical Indo-European dependent marking pattern, with a rich inflectional morphology and relatively free word order, to a mostly analytic pattern with little inflection, a fairly fixed SVO word order and a complex syntax. Modern English relies more on auxiliary verbs and word order for the expression of complex tenses, aspect and mood, as well as passive constructions, interrogatives and some negation. The variation among the accents and dialects of English used in different countries and regions\u2014in terms of phonetics and phonology, and sometimes also vocabulary, grammar, and spelling\u2014can often be understood by speakers of different dialects, but in extreme cases can lead to confusion or even mutual unintelligibility between English speakers.\nWilliam Meyers (23 July 1943 in Johannesburg \u2013 7 May 2014) was a South African boxer who won a bronze medal at the 1960 Summer Olympics in Rome fighting as a featherweight.\nTongelre is a borough of Eindhoven. It used to be a separate village to the east of Eindhoven. Waterways comprise most of its borders. It is bordered to the south by a canal, the \"Eindhovensch Kanaal\" to the borough of Stratum and Geldrop municipality. In the northwest the border with Woensel borough is formed by the river \"Dommel\" and to the east by the river \"Kleine Dommel\" (little Dommel) towards Nuenen municipality.Tongelre was a separate municipality until 1920, when it became part of the municipality of Eindhoven. Today it has nearly 20.000 inhabitants. It is the least urbanised part of Eindhoven.\nThe United States of America (USA), commonly known as the United States (U.S. or US) or America, is a country comprising 50 states, a federal district, five major self-governing territories, and various possessions. At 3.8 million sq mi (9.8 million km2), the United States is the world's third or fourth largest country by total area and is slightly smaller than the entire continent of Europe's 3.93 million sq mi (10.2 million km2). With a population of more than 327 million people, the U.S. is the third most populous country. Most of the country is located contiguously in North America between Canada and Mexico. The extremely diverse geography, climate, and wildlife of the United States make it one of the world's 17 megadiverse countries.Paleo-Indians migrated from Siberia to the North American mainland at least 12,000 years ago. European colonization began in the 16th century. The United States emerged from the thirteen British colonies established along the East Coast. Following the French and Indian War, numerous disputes between Great Britain and the colonies led to the American Revolution, which began in 1775, and the subsequent Declaration of Independence in 1776. The war ended in 1783 with the United States becoming the first country to gain independence from a European power. The current constitution was adopted in 1788, with the first ten amendments, collectively named the Bill of Rights, being ratified in 1791 to guarantee many fundamental civil liberties. The United States embarked on a vigorous expansion across North America throughout the 19th century, acquiring new territories, displacing Native American tribes, and gradually admitting new states until it spanned the continent by 1848.During the second half of the 19th century, the Civil War led to the abolition of slavery. By the end of the century, the United States had extended into the Pacific Ocean, and its economy, driven in large part by the Industrial Revolution, began to soar. The Spanish\u2013American War and World War I confirmed the country's status as a global military power. The United States emerged from World War II as a global superpower and a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council. The end of the Cold War and the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 left the United States as the world's sole superpower.The United States is a federal republic and a representative democracy. It is a founding member of the United Nations, World Bank, International Monetary Fund, Organization of American States (OAS), and many other international organizations. The United States is a highly developed country, with the world's largest economy by nominal GDP and second-largest economy by PPP, accounting for approximately a quarter of global GDP. The U.S. economy is largely post-industrial, characterized by the dominance of services and knowledge-based activities, although the manufacturing sector remains the second-largest in the world. The United States is the world's largest importer and the second largest exporter of goods, by value. Although its population is only 4.3% of the world total, the U.S. holds 31% of the total wealth in the world, the largest share of global wealth concentrated in a single country.Despite income and wealth disparities, the United States continues to rank very high in measures of socioeconomic performance, including average wage, human development, per capita GDP, and worker productivity. The United States is the foremost military power in the world, making up a third of global military spending, and is a leading political, cultural, and scientific force internationally.\nPeter Tiberio (born April 26, 1989) is an American rugby union player.  At 5'11\", 180 lbs, he plays wing for the United States national rugby sevens team and has represented the United States in the IRB Sevens World Series.  Tiberio first represented the US in the IRB Sevens circuit at the Hong Kong Sevens in March 2011. Tiberio also represented the United States at the 2011 Pan American Games, where Tiberio and his teammates earned a bronze medal.\nEngland is a country that is part of the United Kingdom. It shares land borders with Wales to the west and Scotland to the north. The Irish Sea lies west of England and the Celtic Sea to the southwest. England is separated from continental Europe by the North Sea to the east and the English Channel to the south. The country covers five-eighths of the island of Great Britain, which lies in the North Atlantic, and includes over 100 smaller islands, such as the Isles of Scilly and the Isle of Wight.The area now called England was first inhabited by modern humans during the Upper Palaeolithic period, but takes its name from the Angles, a Germanic tribe deriving its name from the Anglia peninsula, who settled during the 5th and 6th centuries. England became a unified state in the 10th century, and since the Age of Discovery, which began during the 15th century, has had a significant cultural and legal impact on the wider world. The English language, the Anglican Church, and English law \u2013 the basis for the common law legal systems of many other countries around the world \u2013 developed in England, and the country's parliamentary system of government has been widely adopted by other nations. The Industrial Revolution began in 18th-century England, transforming its society into the world's first industrialised nation.England's terrain is chiefly low hills and plains, especially in central and southern England. However, there is upland and mountainous terrain in the north (for example, the Lake District and Pennines) and in the west (for example, Dartmoor and the Shropshire Hills). The capital is London, which has the largest metropolitan area in both the United Kingdom and the European Union. England's population of over 55 million comprises 84% of the population of the United Kingdom, largely concentrated around London, the South East, and conurbations in the Midlands, the North West, the North East, and Yorkshire, which each developed as major industrial regions during the 19th century.The Kingdom of England \u2013 which after 1535 included Wales \u2013 ceased being a separate sovereign state on 1 May 1707, when the Acts of Union put into effect the terms agreed in the Treaty of Union the previous year, resulting in a political union with the Kingdom of Scotland to create the Kingdom of Great Britain. In 1801, Great Britain was united with the Kingdom of Ireland (through another Act of Union) to become the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland. In 1922 the Irish Free State seceded from the United Kingdom, leading to the latter being renamed the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.\nFernando de Acu\u00f1a y de Herrera (died 1495) was Viceroy of Sicily for 1489\u20131495.\nRade\u0161ine (Cyrillic: \u0420\u0430\u0434\u0435\u0448\u0438\u043d\u0435) is a village in the municipality of Konjic, Bosnia and Herzegovina.\n", "path": ["peter tiberio", "United States of America", "English", "England", "Kingdom of England"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the diplomatic relation of the country location of the country location of the place of birth of van gasteren?", "correct_answer": "Canada", "model_answer": " [/INST] The country of birth of Louis Alphonse van Gasteren is the Netherlands. The Netherlands is a sovereign state and constitutional monarchy in Europe. It is a founding member of several international organizations, including the EU, Eurozone, NAT", "context": "Canada (Canadian French: [kanad\u0251] listen ) is a country in the northern part of North America. Its ten provinces and three territories extend from the Atlantic to the Pacific and northward into the Arctic Ocean, covering 9.98 million square kilometres (3.85 million square miles), making it the world's second-largest country by total area. Its southern border with the United States, stretching some 8,891 kilometres (5,525 mi), is the world's longest bi-national land border. Canada's capital is Ottawa, and its three largest metropolitan areas are Toronto, Montreal, and Vancouver.As a whole, Canada is sparsely populated, the majority of its land area being dominated by forest and tundra. Its population is highly urbanized, with over 80 percent of its inhabitants concentrated in large and medium-sized cities, and 70 percent of citizens residing within 100 kilometres (62 mi) of the southern border. Canada's climate varies widely across its vast area, ranging from arctic weather in the north, to hot summers in the southern regions, with four distinct seasons.Various indigenous peoples have inhabited what is now Canada for thousands of years before European colonization. Beginning in the 16th century, British and French expeditions explored and later settled along the Atlantic coast. As a consequence of various armed conflicts, France ceded nearly all of its colonies in North America in 1763. In 1867, with the union of three British North American colonies through Confederation, Canada was formed as a federal dominion of four provinces. This began an accretion of provinces and territories and a process of increasing autonomy from the United Kingdom. This widening autonomy was highlighted by the Statute of Westminster of 1931 and culminated in the Canada Act of 1982, which severed the vestiges of legal dependence on the British parliament.Canada is a parliamentary democracy and a constitutional monarchy in the Westminster tradition, with Elizabeth II as its queen and a prime minister who serves as the chair of the Cabinet and head of government. The country is a realm within the Commonwealth of Nations, a member of the Francophonie and officially bilingual at the federal level. It ranks among the highest in international measurements of government transparency, civil liberties, quality of life, economic freedom, and education. It is one of the world's most ethnically diverse and multicultural nations, the product of large-scale immigration from many other countries. Canada's long and complex relationship with the United States has had a significant impact on its economy and culture.A developed country, Canada has the sixteenth-highest nominal per capita income globally as well as the twelfth-highest ranking in the Human Development Index. Its advanced economy is the tenth-largest in the world, relying chiefly upon its abundant natural resources and well-developed international trade networks. Canada is part of several major international and intergovernmental institutions or groupings including the United Nations, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, the G7 (formerly G8), the Group of Ten, the G20, the North American Free Trade Agreement and the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum.\nKargal\u0131k, Korkuteli is a village in the District of Korkuteli, Antalya Province, Turkey.\nThe Netherlands (Dutch: Nederland, [\u02c8ne\u02d0d\u0259rl\u0251nt] (listen)) is a country located mainly in Northwestern Europe. The European portion of the Netherlands consists of twelve provinces that border Germany to the east, Belgium to the south, and the North Sea to the northwest, with maritime borders in the North Sea with Belgium, Germany and the United Kingdom. Together with three island territories in the Caribbean Sea\u2014Bonaire, Sint Eustatius and Saba\u2014it forms a constituent country of the Kingdom of the Netherlands. The official language is Dutch, but a secondary official language in the province of Friesland is West Frisian.The six largest cities in the Netherlands are Amsterdam, Rotterdam, The Hague, Utrecht, Eindhoven and Tilburg. Amsterdam is the country's capital, while The Hague holds the seat of the States General, Cabinet and Supreme Court. The Port of Rotterdam is the largest port in Europe, and the largest in any country outside Asia. The country is a founding member of the EU, Eurozone, G10, NATO, OECD and WTO, as well as a part of the Schengen Area and the trilateral Benelux Union. It hosts several intergovernmental organisations and international courts, many of which are centered in The Hague, which is consequently dubbed 'the world's legal capital'.Netherlands literally means 'lower countries' in reference to its low elevation and flat topography, with only about 50% of its land exceeding 1 metre (3 ft 3 in) above sea level, and nearly 17% falling below sea level. Most of the areas below sea level, known as polders, are the result of land reclamation that began in the 16th century. With a population of 17.30 million people, all living within a total area of roughly 41,500 square kilometres (16,000 sq mi)\u2014of which the land area is 33,700 square kilometres (13,000 sq mi)\u2014the Netherlands is one of the most densely populated countries in the world. Nevertheless, it is the world's second-largest exporter of food and agricultural products (after the United States), owing to its fertile soil, mild climate, and intensive agriculture.The Netherlands has been a parliamentary constitutional monarchy with a unitary structure since 1848. The country has a tradition of pillarisation and a long record of social tolerance, having legalised abortion, prostitution and human euthanasia, along with maintaining a progressive drug policy. The Netherlands abolished the death penalty in 1870, allowed women's suffrage in 1917, and became the world's first country to legalise same-sex marriage in 2001. Its mixed-market advanced economy had the thirteenth-highest per capita income globally. The Netherlands ranks among the highest in international indexes of press freedom, economic freedom, human development, and quality of life, as well as happiness.\nThe Government of Amsterdam consists of several territorial and functional forms of local and regional government. The principal form of government is the municipality of Amsterdam, Netherlands. The municipality's territory covers the city of Amsterdam as well as a number of small towns. The city of Amsterdam is also part of several functional forms of regional government. These include the Waterschap (water board) of  Amstel, Gooi en Vecht, which is responsible for water management, and the Stadsregio (City Region) of Amsterdam, which has responsibilities in the areas of spatial planning and public transport.The municipality of Amsterdam borders the municipalities of Diemen, Weesp, Abcoude, Ouder-Amstel and Amstelveen in the south, Haarlemmermeer and Haarlemmerliede en Spaarnwoude in the west, and Zaanstad, Oostzaan, Landsmeer and Waterland in the north.\nLouis Alphonse van Gasteren (20 November 1922 \u2013 10 May 2016) was a Dutch film director, film producer, and artist. He was born in Amsterdam. He is the son of actor Louis van Gasteren Sr. and singer Elise Menag\u00e9 Challa, and the brother of actress Josephine van Gasteren.\nNureshk (Persian: \u0646\u0648\u0631\u0634\u0643\u200e, also Romanized as N\u016bresh\u1e35; also known as R\u016bshen\u1e35) is a village in Shusef Rural District, Shusef District, Nehbandan County, South Khorasan Province, Iran. At the 2006 census, its population was 19, in 6 families.\nThe Estadio Carlos Salazar Hijo is a football stadium in Mazatenango, Guatemala, home to one of the most traditional first division clubs in the country, Deportivo Suchitep\u00e9quez (los venados). It has a capacity of 10,000 (formerly 12,000) and it is situated in the neighbourhood of Santa Cristina.The stadium was opened on 24 November 1966 and its cost was Q. 8,000,000. It was named after Carlos Salazar, Jr. a local sports commentator who organized a radiothon to fund its construction. It was the first stadium in the country, outside of Guatemala City, to have lighting.On 2 October 1983 Deportivo Suchitep\u00e9quez won the national league title at the stadium by beating Antigua GFC 4-1.In 2000 it was approved by FIFA to host World Cup qualification matches. The Guatemala national team played its first official game at the stadium on 16 July 2000 against the United States during the semifinal round of the 2002 World Cup qualifying. Later that year, Guatemala's last match of the round was played at the Carlos Salazar, where the host team beat Costa Rica 2-1 and forced a playoff between the two teams.In 2007 it hosted one of the two national league final matches, between Suchitep\u00e9quez and C.D. Jalapa.\nKarl Paranya (born June 27, 1975) was the first NCAA Division III athlete to break 4 minutes for the mile.  He did this in the spring of 1997, running 3:57.6 on Haverford College's outdoor track.  Marcus O'Sullivan, one of three men ever to run over 100 sub-4 minute miles, paced Paranya in this record breaking run See the race on youtube.\nThe Kingdom of the Netherlands (Dutch: Koninkrijk der Nederlanden; pronounced [\u02c8ko\u02d0n\u026a\u014bkr\u025bi\u0261 d\u025br \u02c8ne\u02d0d\u0259rl\u0251nd\u0259(n)] (listen)), commonly known as the Netherlands, is a sovereign state and constitutional monarchy with the large majority of its territory in Western Europe and with several small island territories in the Caribbean Sea, in the West Indies islands (Leeward Islands and Lesser Antilles).The four parts of the kingdom\u2014the Netherlands, Aruba, Cura\u00e7ao and Sint Maarten\u2014are constituent countries (landen in Dutch) and participate on a basis of equality as partners in the kingdom. In practice, however, most of the kingdom's affairs are administered by the Netherlands\u2014which comprises roughly 98% of the kingdom's land area and population\u2014on behalf of the entire kingdom. Consequently, the Caribbean Sea islands countries of Aruba, Cura\u00e7ao, and Sint Maarten are dependent on the Netherlands for matters like foreign policy and defence, although they are autonomous to a certain degree, with their own parliaments.The vast majority in land area of the constituent country of the Netherlands is located in Europe, with the exception of the Caribbean Netherlands: its three special municipalities (Bonaire, Saba, and Sint Eustatius) are located in the Caribbean Sea like the other three constituent countries.\n", "path": ["van gasteren", "Amsterdam", "Netherlands", "Kingdom of the Netherlands", "Canada"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the original language of film or TV show of the country location of citizenship of paula toller?", "correct_answer": "English", "model_answer": " [/INST] The original language of the film or TV show that Paula Toller is from is Portuguese. She is a Brazilian singer and songwriter, and Brazil is a country located in South America where Portuguese is the official language.\n\nExplan", "context": "English is a West Germanic language that was first spoken in early medieval England and eventually became a global lingua franca. It is named after the Angles, one of the Germanic tribes that migrated to the area of Great Britain that later took their name, as England. Both names derive from Anglia, a peninsula in the Baltic Sea. The language is closely related to Frisian and Low Saxon, and its vocabulary has been significantly influenced by other Germanic languages, particularly Norse (a North Germanic language), and to a greater extent by Latin and French.English has developed over the course of more than 1,400 years. The earliest forms of English, a group of West Germanic (Ingvaeonic) dialects brought to Great Britain by Anglo-Saxon settlers in the 5th century, are collectively called Old English. Middle English began in the late 11th century with the Norman conquest of England; this was a period in which the language was influenced by French. Early Modern English began in the late 15th century with the introduction of the printing press to London, the printing of the King James Bible and the start of the Great Vowel Shift.Through the worldwide influence of the British Empire, and later the United States, Modern English has been spreading around the world since the 17th century. Through all types of printed and electronic media, and spurred by the emergence of the United States as a global superpower, English has become the leading language of international discourse and the lingua franca in many regions and professional contexts such as science, navigation and law.English is the largest language by number of speakers, and the third most-spoken native language in the world, after Standard Chinese and Spanish. It is the most widely learned second language and is either the official language or one of the official languages in almost 60 sovereign states. There are more people who have learned it as a second language than there are native speakers. It is estimated that there are over 2 billion speakers of English. English is the most commonly spoken language in the United Kingdom, the United States, Canada, Australia, Ireland and New Zealand, and it is widely spoken in some areas of the Caribbean, Africa and South Asia. It is a co-official language of the United Nations, the European Union and many other world and regional international organisations. It is the most widely spoken Germanic language, accounting for at least 70% of speakers of this Indo-European branch. English has a vast vocabulary, though counting how many words any language has is impossible. English speakers are called \"Anglophones\".Modern English grammar is the result of a gradual change from a typical Indo-European dependent marking pattern, with a rich inflectional morphology and relatively free word order, to a mostly analytic pattern with little inflection, a fairly fixed SVO word order and a complex syntax. Modern English relies more on auxiliary verbs and word order for the expression of complex tenses, aspect and mood, as well as passive constructions, interrogatives and some negation. The variation among the accents and dialects of English used in different countries and regions\u2014in terms of phonetics and phonology, and sometimes also vocabulary, grammar, and spelling\u2014can often be understood by speakers of different dialects, but in extreme cases can lead to confusion or even mutual unintelligibility between English speakers.\nThe Rundfunkstaatsvertrag (Interstate Broadcasting Agreement) is the nationwide law for radio station and television licensing in the Federal Republic of Germany. Based on the Kulturhoheit der L\u00e4nder (sovereignty of the German states in terms of cultural aspects) it is not a federal law but instead it is a treaty passed by all Bundesl\u00e4nder (states of Germany).The full title of the law is \"Staatsvertrag f\u00fcr Rundfunk und Telemedien\" (state treaty on broadcasting services and telecommunication media) but in most occasions it is called Rundfunkstaatsvertrag (abbreviated as RStV). The first version was enacted on 1 December 1987 (signed on 3 April 1987) and the fifteenth revision of 30 October 2010 is due to come into effect on 1 January 2013. The German Interstate Broadcasting Agreement is the basis for a series of other laws, most notably the \"Rundfunkgeb\u00fchrenstaatsvertrag\" (RGebStV - Interstate Agreement on Broadcasting Licence Fees) and the Rundfunkfinanzierungsstaatsvertrag  (RFinStV - Interstate Agreement on the Financing of Broadcasting). Some aspects were refined by the federal \"Telemediengesetz\" (TMG - telecommunication media act) that is otherwise covering internet services.The German public broadcasting services were introduced in post-war Germany in a similar fashion to the British Broadcasting Corporation. The Rundfunkstaatsvertrag is similar to the Royal Charter of the BBC however the licensing and financing model diverged over time. The Rundfunkstaatsvertrag was introduced in 1987 to allow licensing of private broadcast companies beyond the public broadcast services that existed before.\nDonald Francis Dale (8 December 1944 \u2013 13 February 1990) was an Australian politician. He was the Country Liberal Party member for Wanguri in the Northern Territory Legislative Assembly from 1983 to 1989, when he resigned due to ill health.He was a minister in the Tuxworth and Hatton governments, serving variously as Minister for Community Development (1986-1987), Minister for Correctional Services (1986-1987), Minister for Youth, Sport, Recreation and Ethnic Affairs (1986-1987) and Minister for Health and Community Services (1987-1989).\nAddaction is a British charity founded in 1967 that supports people to make positive behavioural changes, most notably with alcohol and drug misuse, and mental health. The charity works extensively throughout England and Scotland, with an administrative base in Farringdon, central London.\nPaula Toller (born on August 23, 1962) is a Brazilian singer and songwriter. Toller is most known as the lead singer of Kid Abelha. In 1998, she released her self-titled first solo album, which was very well received. Her second solo album, titled S\u00f3N\u00f3s, was released in 2007.\nBoni Haruna (born 12 June 1957) is the current Nigerian Minister for Youth Development. He was governor of Adamawa State in Nigeria from 29 May 1999 to 29 May 2007. He was a member of the ruling People's Democratic Party (PDP).\nBrazil is a 1985 British-American dystopian science fiction film directed by Terry Gilliam and written by Gilliam, Charles McKeown, and Tom Stoppard. The film stars Jonathan Pryce and features Robert De Niro, Kim Greist, Michael Palin, Katherine Helmond, Bob Hoskins and Ian Holm.The film centres on Sam Lowry, a man trying to find a woman who appears in his dreams while he is working in a mind-numbing job and living in a small apartment, set in a consumer-driven dystopian world in which there is an over-reliance on poorly maintained (and rather whimsical) machines. Brazil's satire of bureaucratic, totalitarian government is reminiscent of George Orwell's Nineteen Eighty-Four and has been called \"Kafkaesque\".Sarah Street's British National Cinema (1997) describes the film as a \"fantasy/satire on bureaucratic society\"; and John Scalzi's Rough Guide to Sci-Fi Movies (2005) describes it as a \"dystopian satire\".Jack Mathews, a film critic and the author of The Battle of Brazil (1987), described the film as \"satirizing the bureaucratic, largely dysfunctional industrial world that had been driving Gilliam crazy all his life\". The film is named after the recurrent theme song, Ary Barroso's \"Aquarela do Brasil\", known simply as \"Brazil\" to British audiences, as performed by Geoff Muldaur.Though a success in Europe, the film was unsuccessful in its initial North America release. It has since become a cult film. In 1999, the British Film Institute voted Brazil the 54th greatest British film of all time. In 2017 a poll of 150 actors, directors, writers, producers and critics for Time Out magazine saw it ranked the 24th best British film ever.\n", "path": ["paula toller", "Brazil", "English"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the mouth of the watercourse of the mouth of the watercourse of olfe?", "correct_answer": "eder", "model_answer": " [/INST] The mouth of the Olfe watercourse is where it joins the Nuhne river. The Olfe is a left tributary that flows into the Nuhne near Neukirchen in Germany.\n\nHere is a brief explanation", "context": "Olfe (also: \u00d6lfe) is a river of Hesse and of North Rhine-Westphalia, Germany. It is a left tributary of the Nuhne near Neukirchen.\nPhilip Jessup (February 5, 1897 - January 31, 1986), also Philip C. Jessup, was a 20th-century American diplomat, scholar, and jurist notable for his accomplishments in the field of international law.\nThe Eder [\u02c8e\u02d0d\u0250] is a 177-kilometre (110 mi) long major river in Germany that begins in eastern North Rhine-Westphalia and passes in to Hesse, where it confluences with the River Fulda.\nThe Ahornb\u00fcchsenkopf is a northern subpeak of the Hoher G\u00f6ll, 1,604 m above sea level (NN) high, in the Berchtesgaden Alps in the county of Berchtesgadener Land, Bavaria, Germany, and the state of Salzburg in Austria.\nZempassogo is a town in the Zorgho Department of Ganzourgou Province in central Burkina Faso. The town has a population of 1,192.\nNuhne is a river of North Rhine-Westphalia and of Hesse, Germany. It is a left tributary of the Eder, which it joins near Frankenberg.\nCarybdea marsupialis, the sea wasp, is a venomous species of cnidarian, in the small family Carybdeidae within the class Cubozoa.\n", "path": ["olfe", "nuhne", "eder"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the replaces of the country location of citizenship of the has part of Slapp Happy?", "correct_answer": "the thirteen colonies", "model_answer": " [/INST] Slapp Happy was a German-English avant-pop band. The band members were Anthony Moore (keyboards), Peter Blegvad (guitar), and Dagmar Krause (vocals). Moore and Blegvad", "context": "Lord Chunshen (Chinese: \u6625\u7533\u541b; pinyin: Ch\u016bnsh\u0113n J\u016bn; Wade\u2013Giles: Ch'un-shen Ch\u00fcn; died 238 BC), born Huang Xie (Chinese: \u9ec3\u6b47; Wade\u2013Giles: Huang Hsieh), was a nobleman, general, and Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Chu during the late Warring States period of ancient China. He was one of the Four Lords of the Warring States.Lord Chunshen is a revered figure in his former fief, especially in Shanghai, which is often called Shencheng, or City of Shen, in his honour. In 2002, Shanghai rebuilt the Temple of Lord Chunshen at the Chunshen Village in Songjiang District.\nPeyhan (Persian: \u067e\u064a\u0647\u0627\u0646\u200e, also Romanized as Peyh\u0101n and P\u012bh\u0101n; also known as P\u0101h\u012b\u0101n, Pahy\u0101n, Paih\u0101n, and Pey M\u0101n) is a village in Kamazan-e Sofla Rural District, Zand District, Malayer County, Hamadan Province, Iran. At the 2006 census, its population was 583, in 146 families.\nPeter Blegvad (born August 14, 1951) is an American musician, singer-songwriter, writer, and cartoonist. He was a founding member of German/English avant-pop band Slapp Happy, which later merged briefly with Henry Cow, and has released many solo and collaborative albums. He is the son of Lenore and Erik Blegvad, who were respectively, a children's book author and illustrator.\nThe United States of America (USA), commonly known as the United States (U.S. or US) or America, is a country comprising 50 states, a federal district, five major self-governing territories, and various possessions. At 3.8 million sq mi (9.8 million km2), the United States is the world's third or fourth largest country by total area and is slightly smaller than the entire continent of Europe's 3.93 million sq mi (10.2 million km2). With a population of more than 327 million people, the U.S. is the third most populous country. Most of the country is located contiguously in North America between Canada and Mexico. The extremely diverse geography, climate, and wildlife of the United States make it one of the world's 17 megadiverse countries.Paleo-Indians migrated from Siberia to the North American mainland at least 12,000 years ago. European colonization began in the 16th century. The United States emerged from the thirteen British colonies established along the East Coast. Following the French and Indian War, numerous disputes between Great Britain and the colonies led to the American Revolution, which began in 1775, and the subsequent Declaration of Independence in 1776. The war ended in 1783 with the United States becoming the first country to gain independence from a European power. The current constitution was adopted in 1788, with the first ten amendments, collectively named the Bill of Rights, being ratified in 1791 to guarantee many fundamental civil liberties. The United States embarked on a vigorous expansion across North America throughout the 19th century, acquiring new territories, displacing Native American tribes, and gradually admitting new states until it spanned the continent by 1848.During the second half of the 19th century, the Civil War led to the abolition of slavery. By the end of the century, the United States had extended into the Pacific Ocean, and its economy, driven in large part by the Industrial Revolution, began to soar. The Spanish\u2013American War and World War I confirmed the country's status as a global military power. The United States emerged from World War II as a global superpower and a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council. The end of the Cold War and the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 left the United States as the world's sole superpower.The United States is a federal republic and a representative democracy. It is a founding member of the United Nations, World Bank, International Monetary Fund, Organization of American States (OAS), and many other international organizations. The United States is a highly developed country, with the world's largest economy by nominal GDP and second-largest economy by PPP, accounting for approximately a quarter of global GDP. The U.S. economy is largely post-industrial, characterized by the dominance of services and knowledge-based activities, although the manufacturing sector remains the second-largest in the world. The United States is the world's largest importer and the second largest exporter of goods, by value. Although its population is only 4.3% of the world total, the U.S. holds 31% of the total wealth in the world, the largest share of global wealth concentrated in a single country.Despite income and wealth disparities, the United States continues to rank very high in measures of socioeconomic performance, including average wage, human development, per capita GDP, and worker productivity. The United States is the foremost military power in the world, making up a third of global military spending, and is a leading political, cultural, and scientific force internationally.\nMorawanocetus is a genus of extinct primitive baleen whale from the family Aetiocetidae that existed during the Chattian stage of the  Oligocene epoch.Its fossils have been found in the North Pacific.Morawanocetus was named by Barnes et al. in 1995, who described the species, M. yabukii. Three new species, dating from 17 to 19 million years ago, were unearthed between 2000 and 2005 in a road-widening project in California.  These three new specimens of Morawanocetus, a genus thought to have gone extinct some five million years earlier, were discovered next to a fourth specimen, still under preparation, which clearly has archaeocete dentition.Morawanocetus was divergent, with wide crania, elaborate cheek, tooth crowns, and short necks.  The first fossils of Morawanocetus were found in the Chattian-aged Morawan Formation of Upper Oligocene Hokkaido. The more recent findings are the first Morawanocetus fossils found in California, a genus more commonly known to Japan.Morawanocetus is a sister taxa to: Aetiocetus, Ashorocetus, Chonecetus, and Willungacetus.\nThe Thirteen Colonies, also known as the Thirteen British Colonies or the Thirteen American Colonies, were a group of colonies of Great Britain on the Atlantic coast of America founded in the 17th and 18th centuries which declared independence in 1776 and formed the United States of America. The Thirteen Colonies had very similar political, constitutional, and legal systems and were dominated by Protestant English-speakers. They were part of Britain's possessions in the New World, which also included colonies in Canada, the Caribbean, and Florida.Between 1625 and 1775, the colonial population grew from roughly 2,000 to 2.4 million, displacing American Indians. This population included people subject to a system of slavery which was legal in all of the colonies prior to the American Revolutionary War. In the 18th century, the British government operated its colonies under a policy of mercantilism, in which the central government administered its possessions for the economic benefit of the mother country. The Thirteen Colonies had a high degree of self-governance and active local elections, and they resisted London's demands for more control. The French and Indian War (1754\u201363) against France and its Indian allies led to growing tensions between Britain and the Thirteen Colonies. In the 1750s, the colonies began collaborating with one another instead of dealing directly with Britain. These inter-colonial activities cultivated a sense of shared American identity and led to calls for protection of the colonists' \"Rights as Englishmen\", especially the principle of \"no taxation without representation\". Grievances with the British government led to the American Revolution, in which the colonies collaborated in forming the Continental Congress. The colonists fought the American Revolutionary War (1775\u201383) with the aid of France and, to a significantly smaller degree, the Dutch Republic and Spain.\nFroschgrundsee also known as Sch\u00f6nst\u00e4dtspeicher is a retention basin to protect the city of Coburg in Bavaria from the flooding of the Itz, Effelder, and the Gr\u00fcmpen. It lies in the municipality of R\u00f6dental in Upper Franconia. Froschgrundsee was completed in 1986 after four years of construction and cost 43 million DM in operations.\nSlapp Happy was a German/English avant-pop group, formed in Germany in 1972. Their lineup consisted of Anthony Moore (keyboards), Peter Blegvad (guitar) and Dagmar Krause (vocals). The band members moved to England in 1974 where they merged with Henry Cow, but the merger ended soon afterwards and Slapp Happy split up. Slapp Happy's sound was characterised by Dagmar Krause's unique vocal style. From 1982 there have been brief reunions to work on an opera, record a CD and tour Japan.\n", "path": ["Slapp Happy", "peter blegvad", "United States of America", "the thirteen colonies"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the replaces of the country location of the capital of the country location of citizenship of shawn hlookoff?", "correct_answer": "the thirteen colonies", "model_answer": " [/INST] Shawn Hlookoff is a Canadian singer, songwriter, and producer. The capital city of Canada is Ottawa, which is located in the eastern portion of southern Ontario on the south bank of the Ottawa River. Ottawa is the political", "context": "Jesse & Noah is a Nashville, Tennessee country-rock duo with roots in central Florida, consisting of brothers Jesse Bellamy and Noah Bellamy. Jesse and Noah were raised in Darby, Florida on their family's cattle farm and got an early taste of the touring musician's life, going on the road frequently with their father, David Milton Bellamy of the country-pop duo, the Bellamy Brothers.In 2002, Jesse and Noah moved from Tampa, Florida, to Nashville, Tennessee. Their debut album with Fort Worth-based Smith Music Group titled Nowhere Revisited was released in 2006. Their song, \"You're the World\", co-written by Jesse Bellamy and David Bellamy, was included on both the Nowhere Revisited album and the Bellamy Brothers' album Jesus Is Coming. The album included a cover of the Tom T. Hall-penned \"Faster Horses\" and earned them the \"Who to Watch in 2007\" title by the Country Music Association.Driven Back was released in August 2012 and featured the song \"You Could Have Had it All\" with accompanying video on CMT.comBrethren (Bellerophon Records) came out in May 2015, an EP of cover versions highlighting sibling harmonies in classic country music, including the Everly Brothers song, \"All I Have to Do Is Dream\".Southern Usonia (independent release) was self-produced at their home studio in Nashville, Tennessee and released October 14, 2016. Rolling Stone Country premiered a video for the single, \"This Town Was Built on Heartbreak Songs\", filmed at the Nashville Palace and featuring footage of honky tonks on Lower Broadway, and celebrity cameos from Tanya Tucker, T. G. Sheppard, Ronnie McDowell, Deborah Allen, and the Bellamy Brothers.\nShawn Hlookoff (born September 5, 1984, South Slocan, British Columbia, Canada), known as Shawn Hook, is a Canadian singer, songwriter and producer.\nCanada (Canadian French: [kanad\u0251] listen ) is a country in the northern part of North America. Its ten provinces and three territories extend from the Atlantic to the Pacific and northward into the Arctic Ocean, covering 9.98 million square kilometres (3.85 million square miles), making it the world's second-largest country by total area. Its southern border with the United States, stretching some 8,891 kilometres (5,525 mi), is the world's longest bi-national land border. Canada's capital is Ottawa, and its three largest metropolitan areas are Toronto, Montreal, and Vancouver.As a whole, Canada is sparsely populated, the majority of its land area being dominated by forest and tundra. Its population is highly urbanized, with over 80 percent of its inhabitants concentrated in large and medium-sized cities, and 70 percent of citizens residing within 100 kilometres (62 mi) of the southern border. Canada's climate varies widely across its vast area, ranging from arctic weather in the north, to hot summers in the southern regions, with four distinct seasons.Various indigenous peoples have inhabited what is now Canada for thousands of years before European colonization. Beginning in the 16th century, British and French expeditions explored and later settled along the Atlantic coast. As a consequence of various armed conflicts, France ceded nearly all of its colonies in North America in 1763. In 1867, with the union of three British North American colonies through Confederation, Canada was formed as a federal dominion of four provinces. This began an accretion of provinces and territories and a process of increasing autonomy from the United Kingdom. This widening autonomy was highlighted by the Statute of Westminster of 1931 and culminated in the Canada Act of 1982, which severed the vestiges of legal dependence on the British parliament.Canada is a parliamentary democracy and a constitutional monarchy in the Westminster tradition, with Elizabeth II as its queen and a prime minister who serves as the chair of the Cabinet and head of government. The country is a realm within the Commonwealth of Nations, a member of the Francophonie and officially bilingual at the federal level. It ranks among the highest in international measurements of government transparency, civil liberties, quality of life, economic freedom, and education. It is one of the world's most ethnically diverse and multicultural nations, the product of large-scale immigration from many other countries. Canada's long and complex relationship with the United States has had a significant impact on its economy and culture.A developed country, Canada has the sixteenth-highest nominal per capita income globally as well as the twelfth-highest ranking in the Human Development Index. Its advanced economy is the tenth-largest in the world, relying chiefly upon its abundant natural resources and well-developed international trade networks. Canada is part of several major international and intergovernmental institutions or groupings including the United Nations, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, the G7 (formerly G8), the Group of Ten, the G20, the North American Free Trade Agreement and the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum.\nThe Thirteen Colonies, also known as the Thirteen British Colonies or the Thirteen American Colonies, were a group of colonies of Great Britain on the Atlantic coast of America founded in the 17th and 18th centuries which declared independence in 1776 and formed the United States of America. The Thirteen Colonies had very similar political, constitutional, and legal systems and were dominated by Protestant English-speakers. They were part of Britain's possessions in the New World, which also included colonies in Canada, the Caribbean, and Florida.Between 1625 and 1775, the colonial population grew from roughly 2,000 to 2.4 million, displacing American Indians. This population included people subject to a system of slavery which was legal in all of the colonies prior to the American Revolutionary War. In the 18th century, the British government operated its colonies under a policy of mercantilism, in which the central government administered its possessions for the economic benefit of the mother country. The Thirteen Colonies had a high degree of self-governance and active local elections, and they resisted London's demands for more control. The French and Indian War (1754\u201363) against France and its Indian allies led to growing tensions between Britain and the Thirteen Colonies. In the 1750s, the colonies began collaborating with one another instead of dealing directly with Britain. These inter-colonial activities cultivated a sense of shared American identity and led to calls for protection of the colonists' \"Rights as Englishmen\", especially the principle of \"no taxation without representation\". Grievances with the British government led to the American Revolution, in which the colonies collaborated in forming the Continental Congress. The colonists fought the American Revolutionary War (1775\u201383) with the aid of France and, to a significantly smaller degree, the Dutch Republic and Spain.\nDesmia sepulchralis is a moth in the family Crambidae. It is found in French Guiana.\nKapardin I was Shilahara ruler of north Konkan branch from c. 797 CE \u2013 825 CE.He was the first known Shilahara king of North Konkan, was placed in charge of the country by the Rashtrakuta  king Govinda III. Since then North Konkan  came to be known as Kapardi-dvipa or Kavadi-dvipa. The capital of this branch was Thane, after which the country was called - Thanesarpura. Their capital seems to have been Thane and their places of note were Hamjaman probably Sanjan in Dahanu, Thane  (Shristhanak), Sopara (Shurparak), Chaul (Chemuli), Lonad (Lavanatata) and than. As the Yadavas call themselves lords of the excellent city of Dvaravatipura or Dwarka and the Kadambas call themselves lords of the excellent city of Banavasipura or Banavasi, so the Shilaharas call themselves lords of the excellent city of Tagarapura or Tagar. This title would furnish a clue to the origin of the Shilaharas it unfortunately, the site of Tagar was not uncertain. From numerous references and grants the Thane Shilaharas seem to have been worshippers of Shiva. (Dept. Gazetteer: 2002)\nOttawa ( (listen), ; French pronunciation: \u200b[\u0254tawa]) is the capital city of Canada. It stands on the south bank of the Ottawa River in the eastern portion of southern Ontario. Ottawa borders Gatineau, Quebec; the two form the core of the Ottawa\u2013Gatineau census metropolitan area (CMA) and the National Capital Region (NCR). As of 2016, Ottawa had a city population of 934,243 and a metropolitan population of 1,323,783 making it the fourth-largest city and the fifth-largest CMA in Canada. In June 2019, the City of Ottawa estimated it had surpassed a population of 1 million.Founded in 1826 as Bytown, and incorporated as Ottawa in 1855, the city has evolved into the political centre of Canada. Its original boundaries were expanded through numerous annexations and were ultimately replaced by a new city incorporation and amalgamation in 2001 which significantly increased its land area. The city name \"Ottawa\" was chosen in reference to the Ottawa River, the name of which is derived from the Algonquin Odawa, meaning \"to trade\".Ottawa has the most educated population among Canadian cities and is home to a number of post-secondary, research, and cultural institutions, including the National Arts Centre, the National Gallery, and numerous national museums. Ottawa has the highest standard of living in the nation and low unemployment.\nHarel Srugo (Hebrew: \u05d4\u05e8\u05d0\u05dc \u05e1\u05e8\u05d5\u05d2\u05d5\u200e; born 15 March 1982) is an Israeli professional tennis player and competes mainly on the ATP Challenger Tour and ITF Futures, both in singles and doubles.Srugo reached his highest ATP singles ranking, No. 703 on 8 April 2002, and his highest ATP doubles ranking, No. 460, on 23 February 2004.\nThe United States of America (USA), commonly known as the United States (U.S. or US) or America, is a country comprising 50 states, a federal district, five major self-governing territories, and various possessions. At 3.8 million sq mi (9.8 million km2), the United States is the world's third or fourth largest country by total area and is slightly smaller than the entire continent of Europe's 3.93 million sq mi (10.2 million km2). With a population of more than 327 million people, the U.S. is the third most populous country. Most of the country is located contiguously in North America between Canada and Mexico. The extremely diverse geography, climate, and wildlife of the United States make it one of the world's 17 megadiverse countries.Paleo-Indians migrated from Siberia to the North American mainland at least 12,000 years ago. European colonization began in the 16th century. The United States emerged from the thirteen British colonies established along the East Coast. Following the French and Indian War, numerous disputes between Great Britain and the colonies led to the American Revolution, which began in 1775, and the subsequent Declaration of Independence in 1776. The war ended in 1783 with the United States becoming the first country to gain independence from a European power. The current constitution was adopted in 1788, with the first ten amendments, collectively named the Bill of Rights, being ratified in 1791 to guarantee many fundamental civil liberties. The United States embarked on a vigorous expansion across North America throughout the 19th century, acquiring new territories, displacing Native American tribes, and gradually admitting new states until it spanned the continent by 1848.During the second half of the 19th century, the Civil War led to the abolition of slavery. By the end of the century, the United States had extended into the Pacific Ocean, and its economy, driven in large part by the Industrial Revolution, began to soar. The Spanish\u2013American War and World War I confirmed the country's status as a global military power. The United States emerged from World War II as a global superpower and a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council. The end of the Cold War and the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 left the United States as the world's sole superpower.The United States is a federal republic and a representative democracy. It is a founding member of the United Nations, World Bank, International Monetary Fund, Organization of American States (OAS), and many other international organizations. The United States is a highly developed country, with the world's largest economy by nominal GDP and second-largest economy by PPP, accounting for approximately a quarter of global GDP. The U.S. economy is largely post-industrial, characterized by the dominance of services and knowledge-based activities, although the manufacturing sector remains the second-largest in the world. The United States is the world's largest importer and the second largest exporter of goods, by value. Although its population is only 4.3% of the world total, the U.S. holds 31% of the total wealth in the world, the largest share of global wealth concentrated in a single country.Despite income and wealth disparities, the United States continues to rank very high in measures of socioeconomic performance, including average wage, human development, per capita GDP, and worker productivity. The United States is the foremost military power in the world, making up a third of global military spending, and is a leading political, cultural, and scientific force internationally.\n", "path": ["shawn hlookoff", "Canada", "Ottawa", "United States of America", "the thirteen colonies"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the country location of farallon de pajaros?", "correct_answer": "United States of America", "model_answer": " [/INST] Answer: The Farallon de Pajaros is a small volcanic island located in the Northern Mariana Islands chain in the Pacific Ocean.\n\nExplanation: The context does not provide the exact location of the island, but", "context": "Rub\u00e9n Andr\u00e9s Taucare Espinoza (born 5 July 1982) is a Chilean footballer. His last club was Deportes Iquique. He plays as centre back.\nFarall\u00f3n de P\u00e1jaros (from Spanish Farall\u00f3n de los p\u00e1jaros, meaning \"Birds' Rock\"), also known as Urracas (from Spanish Urracas, meaning \"Magpies\"), is a small (2.3 km2) uninhabited volcanic island, the northernmost island in the Northern Mariana Islands chain.\nOudenhoorn is a village in the Dutch province of South Holland. It was a part of the municipality of Nissewaard but, since the 1st of January 2018 it's part of the municipality of Hellevoetsluis and lies about 3 km east of Hellevoetsluis.In 2001, the village of Oudenhoorn had 584 inhabitants. The built-up area of the village was 0.11 km\u00b2, and contained 247 residences. The wider statistical area of Oudenhoorn has a population of around 1210.Until 2015, Oudenhoorn was part of Bernisse.\nRome, From Mount Aventine is an 1835 painting by J M W Turner, based on drawings made by him in the city in 1828. It shows a view of the city of Rome from the Aventine Hill.It was exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1836, where it was described by the Morning Post as \"one of those amazing pictures by which Mr Turner dazzles the imagination and confounds all criticism: it is beyond praise\u201d.It had been commissioned from Turner by Hugh Andrew Johnstone Munro of Novar and remained in his family collection until it was bought by the 5th Earl of Roseberry in 1878. It then remained in the Roseberry collection until 2014. It was sold at Sotheby's in London on 3 December 2014 to a telephone bidder for \u00a330.3m including buyer's premium, having had an estimate of \u00a315-20m.\nMy Name Will Live On is the fourth album from the Italian heavy metal band Doomsword, released in 2007. The album cover art is Vercingetorix Surrenders to Caesar, by Lionel Royer used with permission.\nThe United States of America (USA), commonly known as the United States (U.S. or US) or America, is a country comprising 50 states, a federal district, five major self-governing territories, and various possessions. At 3.8 million sq mi (9.8 million km2), the United States is the world's third or fourth largest country by total area and is slightly smaller than the entire continent of Europe's 3.93 million sq mi (10.2 million km2). With a population of more than 327 million people, the U.S. is the third most populous country. Most of the country is located contiguously in North America between Canada and Mexico. The extremely diverse geography, climate, and wildlife of the United States make it one of the world's 17 megadiverse countries.Paleo-Indians migrated from Siberia to the North American mainland at least 12,000 years ago. European colonization began in the 16th century. The United States emerged from the thirteen British colonies established along the East Coast. Following the French and Indian War, numerous disputes between Great Britain and the colonies led to the American Revolution, which began in 1775, and the subsequent Declaration of Independence in 1776. The war ended in 1783 with the United States becoming the first country to gain independence from a European power. The current constitution was adopted in 1788, with the first ten amendments, collectively named the Bill of Rights, being ratified in 1791 to guarantee many fundamental civil liberties. The United States embarked on a vigorous expansion across North America throughout the 19th century, acquiring new territories, displacing Native American tribes, and gradually admitting new states until it spanned the continent by 1848.During the second half of the 19th century, the Civil War led to the abolition of slavery. By the end of the century, the United States had extended into the Pacific Ocean, and its economy, driven in large part by the Industrial Revolution, began to soar. The Spanish\u2013American War and World War I confirmed the country's status as a global military power. The United States emerged from World War II as a global superpower and a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council. The end of the Cold War and the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 left the United States as the world's sole superpower.The United States is a federal republic and a representative democracy. It is a founding member of the United Nations, World Bank, International Monetary Fund, Organization of American States (OAS), and many other international organizations. The United States is a highly developed country, with the world's largest economy by nominal GDP and second-largest economy by PPP, accounting for approximately a quarter of global GDP. The U.S. economy is largely post-industrial, characterized by the dominance of services and knowledge-based activities, although the manufacturing sector remains the second-largest in the world. The United States is the world's largest importer and the second largest exporter of goods, by value. Although its population is only 4.3% of the world total, the U.S. holds 31% of the total wealth in the world, the largest share of global wealth concentrated in a single country.Despite income and wealth disparities, the United States continues to rank very high in measures of socioeconomic performance, including average wage, human development, per capita GDP, and worker productivity. The United States is the foremost military power in the world, making up a third of global military spending, and is a leading political, cultural, and scientific force internationally.\n", "path": ["farallon de pajaros", "United States of America"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the named after of the continent of mount finch?", "correct_answer": "Arctic", "model_answer": " [/INST] Mount Finch is a mountain named after Lieutenant Jerry L. Finch, a U.S. Navy officer who was the project officer for infrared ice sounding equipment and an aircraft commander during Operation Deep Freeze in Antarctica in", "context": "The 2005 New York Jets season was the franchise's 36th season in the National Football League (NFL), the 46th season overall, and the fifth and final under head coach Herman Edwards.  The Jets were attempting to improve upon their 10\u20136 record from 2004 but failed to do so, and finished the season with a 4\u201312 record, missing the playoffs for the first time since 2003.\nMount Finch (72\u00b034\u2032S 167\u00b023\u2032E) is a mountain, 2,100 metres (6,900 ft) high, standing at the west side of the mouth of Trainer Glacier where the latter enters Trafalgar Glacier, in the Victory Mountains of Victoria Land, Antarctica. It was mapped by the United States Geological Survey from surveys and U.S. Navy air photos, 1960\u201364, and was named by the Advisory Committee on Antarctic Names for Lieutenant Jerry L. Finch, U.S. Navy, Squadron VX-6 project officer for infrared ice sounding equipment and an aircraft commander in Operation Deep Freeze, 1968.\nAntarctica (UK:  or , US:  (listen)) is Earth's southernmost continent. It contains the geographic South Pole and is situated in the Antarctic region of the Southern Hemisphere, almost entirely south of the Antarctic Circle, and is surrounded by the Southern Ocean. At 14,200,000 square kilometres (5,500,000 square miles), it is the fifth-largest continent and nearly twice the size of Australia. At 0.00008 people per square kilometre, it is by far the least densely populated continent. About 98% of Antarctica is covered by ice that averages 1.9 km (1.2 mi; 6,200 ft) in thickness, which extends to all but the northernmost reaches of the Antarctic Peninsula.Antarctica, on average, is the coldest, driest, and windiest continent, and has the highest average elevation of all the continents. Most of Antarctica is a polar desert, with annual precipitation of 20 cm (7.9 in) along the coast and far less inland. The temperature in Antarctica has reached \u221289.2 \u00b0C (\u2212128.6 \u00b0F) (or even \u221294.7 \u00b0C (\u2212135.8 \u00b0F) as measured from space), though the average for the third quarter (the coldest part of the year) is \u221263 \u00b0C (\u221281 \u00b0F). Anywhere from 1,000 to 5,000 people reside throughout the year at research stations scattered across the continent. Organisms native to Antarctica include many types of algae, bacteria, fungi, plants, protista, and certain animals, such as mites, nematodes, penguins, seals and tardigrades. Vegetation, where it occurs, is tundra.Antarctica is noted as the last region on Earth in recorded history to be discovered, unseen until 1820 when the Russian expedition of Fabian Gottlieb von Bellingshausen and Mikhail Lazarev on Vostok and Mirny sighted the Fimbul ice shelf. The continent, however, remained largely neglected for the rest of the 19th century because of its hostile environment, lack of easily accessible resources, and isolation. In 1895, the first confirmed landing was conducted by a team of Norwegians.Antarctica is a de facto condominium, governed by parties to the Antarctic Treaty System that have consulting status. Twelve countries signed the Antarctic Treaty in 1959, and thirty-eight have signed it since then. The treaty prohibits military activities and mineral mining, prohibits nuclear explosions and nuclear waste disposal, supports scientific research, and protects the continent's ecozone. Ongoing experiments are conducted by more than 4,000 scientists from many nations.\nThe Arctic ( or ) is a polar region located at the northernmost part of Earth. The Arctic consists of the Arctic Ocean, adjacent seas, and parts of Alaska (United States), Finland, Greenland (Denmark), Iceland, Northern Canada, Norway, Russia and Sweden. Land within the Arctic region has seasonally varying snow and ice cover, with predominantly treeless permafrost (permanently frozen underground ice)-containing tundra. Arctic seas contain seasonal sea ice in many places.The Arctic region is a unique area among Earth's ecosystems. For example, the cultures in the region and the Arctic indigenous peoples have adapted to its cold and extreme conditions. Life in the Arctic includes organisms living in the ice, zooplankton and phytoplankton, fish and marine mammals, birds, land animals, plants and human societies. Arctic land is bordered by the subarctic.\nThe Toll-Gate is a Regency novel by Georgette Heyer, which takes place in 1817. Unlike many of Heyer's historical novels which concentrate on a plucky heroine, this one follows the adventures of a male main character, an ex-captain in the British Army who has returned from the Peninsular War and finds life as a civilian rather dull. The setting for this detective/romance story is in and around a Toll-Gate in the Peak District, vastly different from the elegant backgrounds of London, Bath, Brighton, or some stately home, which characterize most of Heyer's Regency novels.\nHypselodoris rosans is a species of colourful sea slug or dorid nudibranch, a marine gastropod mollusc in the family Chromodorididae.\nRoberto Carifi (born 1948 in Pistoia), is an Italian poet, philosopher, and translator.\n", "path": ["mount finch", "Antarctica", "Arctic"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the country location of origin of the sport of 2009 hong kong cricket sixes?", "correct_answer": "England", "model_answer": " [/INST] The 2009 Hong Kong Cricket Sixes took place in Hong Kong, which is a special administrative region of China. The tournament was hosted at Kowloon Cricket Club in Hong Kong. While cricket has origins in England,", "context": "Waat is a village in South Sudan. It is located in Nyirol County, Eastern Bieh, in the northeastern part of South Sudan. Before the reorganisation of states in 2015, it was part of Jonglei state. It is connected by road to Faddoi just to the southeast\nThe 2009 Hong Kong Cricket Sixes was the fifteenth contesting of the tournament, taking place at Kowloon Cricket Club, Hong Kong.  Eight nations competed in twenty-two matches over two days, 31 October \u2013 1 November 2009.  South Africa won the tournament, narrowly defeating hosts Hong Kong in the final, after Farhaan Behardien hit the required six off the last ball of the match.Despite losing in the final, Hong Kong's Irfan Ahmed was awarded the Ben Hollioake Trophy, given to the player of the tournament.  He played in all seven of Hong Kong's matches, and finished with 163 runs, which was bettered only by England's Peter Trego.  He also claimed three wickets in the tournament, at an economy of 13.63 runs per over, ranking him fifth of all bowlers for economy.  South Africa's David Wiese claimed the most wickets, taking seven in his seven matches.  Peter Trego topped the batting charts with 184 runs, boosted by a top-score of 65* after returning to bat in England's third match after they'd lost four wickets.  His 21 sixes were also the most scored by a batsman in the tournament.\nW.E. Powell was a 19th-century footballer who played for Burslem Port Vale.\nEngland is a country that is part of the United Kingdom. It shares land borders with Wales to the west and Scotland to the north. The Irish Sea lies west of England and the Celtic Sea to the southwest. England is separated from continental Europe by the North Sea to the east and the English Channel to the south. The country covers five-eighths of the island of Great Britain, which lies in the North Atlantic, and includes over 100 smaller islands, such as the Isles of Scilly and the Isle of Wight.The area now called England was first inhabited by modern humans during the Upper Palaeolithic period, but takes its name from the Angles, a Germanic tribe deriving its name from the Anglia peninsula, who settled during the 5th and 6th centuries. England became a unified state in the 10th century, and since the Age of Discovery, which began during the 15th century, has had a significant cultural and legal impact on the wider world. The English language, the Anglican Church, and English law \u2013 the basis for the common law legal systems of many other countries around the world \u2013 developed in England, and the country's parliamentary system of government has been widely adopted by other nations. The Industrial Revolution began in 18th-century England, transforming its society into the world's first industrialised nation.England's terrain is chiefly low hills and plains, especially in central and southern England. However, there is upland and mountainous terrain in the north (for example, the Lake District and Pennines) and in the west (for example, Dartmoor and the Shropshire Hills). The capital is London, which has the largest metropolitan area in both the United Kingdom and the European Union. England's population of over 55 million comprises 84% of the population of the United Kingdom, largely concentrated around London, the South East, and conurbations in the Midlands, the North West, the North East, and Yorkshire, which each developed as major industrial regions during the 19th century.The Kingdom of England \u2013 which after 1535 included Wales \u2013 ceased being a separate sovereign state on 1 May 1707, when the Acts of Union put into effect the terms agreed in the Treaty of Union the previous year, resulting in a political union with the Kingdom of Scotland to create the Kingdom of Great Britain. In 1801, Great Britain was united with the Kingdom of Ireland (through another Act of Union) to become the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland. In 1922 the Irish Free State seceded from the United Kingdom, leading to the latter being renamed the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.\nCricket is a bat-and-ball game played between two teams of eleven players on a field at the centre of which is a 20-metre (22-yard) pitch with a wicket at each end, each comprising two bails balanced on three stumps. The batting side scores runs by striking the ball bowled at the wicket with the bat, while the bowling and fielding side tries to prevent this and dismiss each player (so they are \"out\"). Means of dismissal include being bowled, when the ball hits the stumps and dislodges the bails, and by the fielding side catching the ball after it is hit by the bat, but before it hits the ground. When ten players have been dismissed, the innings ends and the teams swap roles. The game is adjudicated by two umpires, aided by a third umpire and match referee in international matches. They communicate with two off-field scorers who record the match's statistical information.There are various formats ranging from Twenty20, played over a few hours with each team batting for a single innings of 20 overs, to Test matches, played over five days with unlimited overs and the teams each batting for two innings of unlimited length. Traditionally cricketers play in all-white kit, but in limited overs cricket they wear club or team colours. In addition to the basic kit, some players wear protective gear to prevent injury caused by the ball, which is a hard, solid spheroid made of compressed leather with a slightly raised sewn seam enclosing a cork core which is layered with tightly wound string.Historically, cricket's origins are uncertain and the earliest definite reference is in south-east England in the middle of the 16th century. It spread globally with the expansion of the British Empire, leading to the first international matches in the second half of the 19th century. The game's governing body is the International Cricket Council (ICC), which has over 100 members, twelve of which are full members who play Test matches. The game's rules are held in a code called the Laws of Cricket which is owned and maintained by Marylebone Cricket Club (MCC) in London. The sport is followed primarily in the Indian subcontinent, Australasia, the United Kingdom, southern Africa and the West Indies, its globalisation occurring during the expansion of the British Empire and remaining popular into the 21st century. Women's cricket, which is organised and played separately, has also achieved international standard. The most successful side playing international cricket is Australia, having won seven One Day International trophies, including five World Cups, more than any other country and having been the top-rated Test side more than any other country.\nCaraga Regional Hospital is located in Surigao City, on the northeastern tip of the Philippine island of Mindanao. The hospital is one of at least three hospitals serving the area. The three (Caraga, Miranda Hospital and Surigao Medical Center) all are located within 1 1\u20442 miles (2.4 km) of each other on National Road, which leads from the city proper south to the city airport.In 1941 the Philippine Commonwealth government appropriated money to establish a hospital in Surigao. However, in 1942 Japan seized control of the Philippines from the United States, disrupting plans to build the hospital. In 1948, after independence was achieved, construction began on what was to become Surigao Provincial Hospital. The building was completed at the end of 1949 and was opened in January 1950 with a capacity of twenty-five beds.The hospital was expanded and the number of beds increased in 1958 to fifty beds. The hospital continued to grow to seventy-five beds and in 1970 it grew to 100 beds. The current number of beds, 150, was authorized in 1975. In 1993 the hospital was devolved by the Philippine government to the province of Surigao del Norte. On February 11, 1997, the hospital was renamed Caraga Regional Hospital.Today Caraga Regional provides many in-patient and out-patient services to the residents of the Surigao area.\nThomas Farnolls Pritchard or Farnolls Pritchard  (c. 1723\u201323 December 1777) was an English architect and interior decorator who is best remembered for his design of the first cast-iron bridge in the world.\n", "path": ["2009 hong kong cricket sixes", "cricket", "England"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the capital of the country location of origin of the continent of the country location of cornwall film festival?", "correct_answer": "Stockholm", "model_answer": " [/INST] The capital city of the country where the Cornwall Film Festival is located is Stockholm, Sweden.\n\nExplanation: The Cornwall Film Festival is an annual event held in Falmouth, Cornwall, in the United Kingdom. However, the", "context": "Sweden (Swedish: Sverige [\u02c8sv\u00e6rj\u025b] (listen)), formal name: the Kingdom of Sweden (Swedish: Konungariket Sverige ), is a Scandinavian Nordic country in Northern Europe. It borders Norway to the west and north and Finland to the east, and is connected to Denmark in the southwest by a bridge-tunnel across the \u00d6resund, a strait at the Swedish-Danish border. At 450,295 square kilometres (173,860 sq mi), Sweden is the largest country in Northern Europe, the third-largest country in the European Union and the fifth largest country in Europe by area. Sweden has a total population of 10.3 million of which 2.5 million have a foreign background. It has a low population density of 22 inhabitants per square kilometre (57/sq mi). The highest concentration is in the central and southern half of the country.Sweden is part of the geographical area of Fennoscandia. The climate is in general very mild for its northerly latitude due to significant maritime influence. In spite of the high latitude, Sweden often has warm continental summers, being located in between the North Atlantic, the Baltic Sea and the vast Eurasian Russian landmass. The general climate and environment varies significantly from the south and north due to the vast latitudal difference and much of Sweden has reliably cold and snowy winters. It also has a vast coastline with many offshore islands, many lakes, a large proportion of the country covered by forests and includes a portion of the Scandinavian Mountains.Germanic peoples have inhabited Sweden since prehistoric times, emerging into history as the Geats (Swedish G\u00f6tar) and Swedes (Svear) and constituting the sea peoples known as the Norsemen. Southern Sweden is predominantly agricultural, while the north is heavily forested.  Today,  the sovereign state of Sweden is a constitutional monarchy and parliamentary democracy, with a monarch as head of state, like its neighbour Norway. The capital city is Stockholm, which is also the most populous city in the country. Legislative power is vested in the 349-member unicameral Riksdag. Executive power is exercised by the government chaired by the prime minister. Sweden is a unitary state, currently divided into 21 counties and 290 municipalities.An independent Swedish state emerged during the early 12th century. After the Black Death in the middle of the 14th century killed about a third of the Scandinavian population, the Hanseatic League threatened Scandinavia's culture, finances and languages. This led to the forming of the Scandinavian Kalmar Union in 1397, which Sweden left in 1523. When Sweden became involved in the Thirty Years War on the Reformist side, an expansion of its territories began and eventually the Swedish Empire was formed. This became one of the great powers of Europe until the early 18th century. Swedish territories outside the Scandinavian Peninsula were gradually lost during the 18th and 19th centuries, ending with the annexation of present-day Finland by Russia in 1809. The last war in which Sweden was directly involved was in 1814, when Norway was militarily forced into personal union. Since then, Sweden has been at peace, maintaining an official policy of neutrality in foreign affairs. The union with Norway was peacefully dissolved in 1905. Sweden was formally neutral through both world wars and the Cold War, albeit Sweden has since 2009 openly moved towards cooperation with NATO. Sweden has close relations to its Nordic neighbours, including linguistically, with the Swedish language being an official language in Finland and Swedish also being mutually intelligible with Danish and Norwegian.After the end of the Cold War, Sweden joined the European Union (EU) on 1 January 1995, but declined NATO membership, as well as Eurozone (EZ) membership following a referendum. It is also a member of the United Nations, the Nordic Council, the Council of Europe, the World Trade Organization and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). Sweden maintains a Nordic social welfare system that provides universal health care and tertiary education for its citizens. It has the world's eleventh-highest per capita income and ranks highly in numerous metrics of national performance, including quality of life, health, education, protection of civil liberties, economic competitiveness, equality, prosperity and human development.\nTom McNab is a former association football player who represented New Zealand at international level.McNab, who captained and Auckland select side against visiting Manchester United in 1967, made his full All Whites debut in a 3-5 loss to Australia on 5  November 1967 and ended his international playing career with five A-international caps to his credit, his final cap an appearance in a 0-0 draw New Caledonia on 25 July 1969.Following his retirement from football, McNab was injured in a workplace accident and spent the remainder of his life in a wheelchair. He died on 5 April 2006, aged 72.\nStockholm (Swedish pronunciation: [\u00b2st\u0254k(h)\u0254lm] (listen)) is the capital of Sweden and the most populous urban area in the Nordic countries; 965,232 people live in the municipality, approximately 1.6 million in the urban area, and 2.4 million in the metropolitan area. The city stretches across fourteen islands where Lake M\u00e4laren flows into the Baltic Sea. Outside the city to the east, and along the coast, is the island chain of the Stockholm archipelago. The area has been settled since the Stone Age, in the 6th millennium BC, and was founded as a city in 1252 by Swedish statesman Birger Jarl. It is also the county seat of Stockholm County.Stockholm is the cultural, media, political, and economic centre of Sweden. The Stockholm region alone accounts for over a third of the country's GDP, and is among the top 10 regions in Europe by GDP per capita. It is an important global city, and the main centre for corporate headquarters in the Nordic region. The city is home to some of Europe's top ranking universities, such as the Stockholm School of Economics, Karolinska Institute and Royal Institute of Technology (KTH). It hosts the annual Nobel Prize ceremonies and banquet at the Stockholm Concert Hall and Stockholm City Hall. One of the city's most prized museums, the Vasa Museum, is the most visited non-art museum in Scandinavia. The Stockholm metro, opened in 1950, is well known for the decor of its stations; it has been called the longest art gallery in the world. Sweden's national football arena is located north of the city centre, in Solna. Ericsson Globe, the national indoor arena, is in the southern part of the city. The city was the host of the 1912 Summer Olympics, and hosted the equestrian portion of the 1956 Summer Olympics otherwise held in Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.Stockholm is the seat of the Swedish government and most of its agencies, including the highest courts in the judiciary, and the official residencies of the Swedish monarch and the Prime Minister. The government has its seat in the Rosenbad building, the Riksdag (Swedish parliament) is seated in the Parliament House, and the Prime Minister's residence is adjacent at Sager House. Stockholm Palace is the official residence and principal workplace of the Swedish monarch, while Drottningholm Palace, a World Heritage Site on the outskirts of Stockholm, serves as the Royal Family's private residence.\nThe Cornwall Film Festival (Cornish: Gool fylm Kernow) is an annual festival, first established in 2002, which focuses on supporting and celebrating the film and media industry in tCornwall.  Aside from the annual festival, the organisation also engages with film-makers and audiences throughout the year by offering local and national premieres, and hosting masterclasses, workshops and discussions for everyone from the enthusiast to the professional.The film festival has been recognised by a number of well-known individuals in the film industry, such as film critic Mark Kermode, who created a five-minute promotional video for the event in 2013.The festival supports Cornish film making in both the Cornish and English language and there is a \"govynn kernewek\" competition in which applicants present their idea for a film in the Cornish language, with the winners receiving financial, material and technical support for the production.Many film-makers who work solely in English will refer to themselves as Cornish film-makers. Their films often make use of Cornish themes, landscape and way of life. Certainly the concept of a Cornish film industry exists, the term 'Oggywood' has been coined (from oggy meaning pasty and Hollywood). Similarly there has been a Young People's Festival which runs a day prior to the main festival. This has run for the same amount of time as the main festival.In 2014, a new director was appointed by the board to create a \"sustainable creative vision\" for the future of the festival.The 2019 event is scheduled to take place from the 15th-17th November at The Poly in Falmouth.\nThe United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, commonly known as the United Kingdom (UK) or Britain, is a sovereign country located off the north-western coast of the European mainland. The United Kingdom includes the island of Great Britain, the north-eastern part of the island of Ireland, and many smaller islands. Northern Ireland is the only part of the United Kingdom that shares a land border with another sovereign state, the Republic of Ireland. Apart from this land border, the United Kingdom is surrounded by the Atlantic Ocean, with the North Sea to the east, the English Channel to the south and the Celtic Sea to the south-west, giving it the 12th-longest coastline in the world. The Irish Sea lies between Great Britain and Ireland. The United Kingdom's 242,500 square kilometres (93,600 sq mi) were home to an estimated 66.0 million inhabitants in 2017.The United Kingdom is a unitary parliamentary democracy and constitutional monarchy. The current monarch is Queen Elizabeth II, who has reigned since 1952, making her the world's longest-serving current head of state. The United Kingdom's capital and largest city is London, a global city and financial centre with an urban area population of 10.3 million. Other major cities include Birmingham, Manchester, Glasgow, Leeds and Liverpool.The United Kingdom consists of four constituent countries: England, Scotland, Wales, and Northern Ireland. Their capitals are London, Edinburgh, Cardiff, and Belfast, respectively. Apart from England, the countries have their own devolved governments, each with varying powers, but such power is delegated by the Parliament of the United Kingdom, which may enact laws unilaterally altering or abolishing devolution (England does not have any devolved power). The nearby Isle of Man, Bailiwick of Guernsey and Bailiwick of Jersey are not part of the UK, being Crown dependencies with the British Government responsible for defence and international representation. The medieval conquest and subsequent annexation of Wales by the Kingdom of England, followed by the union between England and Scotland in 1707 to form the Kingdom of Great Britain, and the union in 1801 of Great Britain with the Kingdom of Ireland created the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland. Five-sixths of Ireland seceded from the UK in 1922, leaving the present formulation of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. There are fourteen British Overseas Territories, the remnants of the British Empire which, at its height in the 1920s, encompassed almost a quarter of the world's land mass and was the largest empire in history. British influence can be observed in the language, culture and political systems of many of its former colonies.The United Kingdom is a developed country and has the world's fifth-largest economy by nominal GDP and ninth-largest economy by purchasing power parity. It has a high-income economy and has a very high Human Development Index rating, ranking 14th in the world. It was the world's first industrialised country and the world's foremost power during the 19th and early 20th centuries. The UK remains a great power, with considerable economic, cultural, military, scientific and political influence internationally. It is a recognised nuclear weapons state and is sixth in military expenditure in the world. It has been a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council since its first session in 1946. It has been a leading member state of the European Union (EU) and its predecessor, the European Economic Community (EEC), since 1973; however, a referendum in 2016 resulted in 51.9 per cent of UK voters favouring leaving the European Union, and the country's exit is being negotiated. The United Kingdom is also a member of the Commonwealth of Nations, the Council of Europe, the G7, the G20, NATO, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), Interpol and the World Trade Organization (WTO).\nDon Bendell (born  January 8, 1947, in Akron, Ohio) is an American author, rancher, tracker, Producer/Director/Actor  and a former Green Beret. He has published 29 books and assisted in exposing former Atlantic City Mayor Bob Levy's claims of serving as a Green Beret as false.Bendell has had his work published in several newspapers and magazines, such as The American Spectator. Bendell is skilled in multiple martial arts, previously owned his own karate schools, and is a 1995 inductee into the International Karate & Kickboxing Hall of Fame.\nSvetlana Pessova (born September 27, 1981 in Ashgabat) is a retired Turkmen long jumper. Pessova qualified for the Turkmen squad in the women's long jump at the 2004 Summer Olympics in Athens by granting a tripartite invitation from the National Olympic Committee of Turkmenistan and the IAAF with her entry jump of 6.63 metres. During the prelims, Pessova fouled her first attempt, but managed to put down a tremendous effort with a 5.64-metre leap on her second attempt, missing the target by nearly a single metre from her personal best. Taking a leap by a six-centimetre deficit on her last attempt, Pessova became the last among the thirty-seven remaining long jumpers to earn a spot on the overall standings at the end of the qualifying stage.\nEurope is a Swedish rock band formed in Upplands V\u00e4sby in 1979,  by vocalist Joey Tempest, guitarist John Norum, bassist Peter Olsson, and drummer Tony Reno. They got a major breakthrough in Sweden in 1982 by winning the televised competition \"Rock-SM\" (Swedish Rock Championships): it was the first time this competition was held, and Europe became a larger success than the competition itself.Since their formation, Europe has released eleven studio albums, three live albums, three compilations and twenty-four music videos.Europe rose to international fame in the 1980s with their third album, 1986's The Final Countdown, which has sold over 3 million copies in the United States and 15 million copies worldwide (including album and single). Europe have sold over 25 million records worldwide.  The band has had two top 20 albums on the Billboard 200 chart (The Final Countdown  and Out of This World) and three top 30 singles on the Billboard Hot 100 chart (\"The Final Countdown\", \"Rock the Night\" and \"Carrie\").Europe went on hiatus in 1992, reunited temporarily for a one-off performance in Stockholm on New Year's Eve 1999 and announced an official reunion in 2003. Since then the band has released six albums, Start from the Dark (2004), Secret Society (2006), Last Look at Eden (2009), Bag of Bones (2012), War of Kings (2015) and Walk the Earth (2017).Europe has achieved new attention in the US due to being featured in a GEICO Insurance cable television commercial campaign viewed for many months across the US in 2015\u201316.The band is mainly influenced by Whitesnake, Deep Purple, Rainbow, Led Zeppelin, Thin Lizzy, UFO and Michael Schenker Group.\nRevealer of Secrets, first published in 1819, is an epistolary novel by Joseph Perl, a proponent of Jewish emancipation and Haskalah. It is often considered the first modern novel in Hebrew. The book purports to be a collection of letters between various hasidic rabbis, but is actually a satire of their teachings. It is an unusual book in that it satirizes the language and style of early hasidic rabbis writing in Hebrew, which was not the vernacular of the Jews of its time. To make his work available and accessible to his contemporaries, Perl translated his own work into Yiddish. It is currently in print only in an English translation, by Dov Taylor, published by Westview Press.\n", "path": ["cornwall film festival", "United Kingdom", "Europe", "Sweden", "Stockholm"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the located in the administrative terroritorial entity of the shares border with of the lowest point of the country location of borta creek?", "correct_answer": "trabzon province", "model_answer": " [/INST] The Borta Creek is located in the administrative territorial entity of Romania and shares a border with the Transylvania region. The lowest point of Romania is the Black Sea, which the Borta Creek eventually empties into.\n\n", "context": "Trabzon Province (Turkish: Trabzon ili) is a province of Turkey on the Black Sea coast. Located in a strategically important region, Trabzon is one of the oldest trade port cities in Anatolia.  Neighbouring provinces are Giresun to the west, G\u00fcm\u00fc\u015fhane to the southwest, Bayburt to the southeast and Rize to the east. The provincial capital is Trabzon city, and the traffic code is 61. The major ethnic groups are Turks, but the province is also home to a minority of Muslim Pontic Greek speakers, though younger speakers are not always fluent in this language.\nNGC 7537 is a spiral galaxy located in the constellation Pisces.\nRomania ( (listen) ro-MAY-nee-\u0259; Romanian: Rom\u00e2nia [rom\u0268\u02c8ni.a]  (listen)) is a country located at the crossroads of Central, Eastern, and Southeastern Europe. It borders the Black Sea to the southeast, Bulgaria to the south, Ukraine to the north, Hungary to the west, Serbia to the southwest, and Moldova to the east. It has a predominantly temperate-continental climate. With a total area of 238,397 square kilometres (92,046 sq mi), Romania is the 12th largest country and also the 7th most populous member state of the European Union, having almost 20 million inhabitants. Its capital and largest city is Bucharest, and other major urban areas include Cluj-Napoca, Timi\u0219oara, Ia\u0219i, Constan\u021ba, Craiova, and Bra\u0219ov.The River Danube, Europe's second-longest river, rises in Germany's Black Forest and flows in a general southeast direction for 2,857 km (1,775 mi), coursing through ten countries before emptying into Romania's Danube Delta. The Carpathian Mountains, which cross Romania from the north to the southwest, include Moldoveanu Peak, at an altitude of 2,544 m (8,346 ft).Modern Romania was formed in 1859 through a personal union of the Danubian Principalities of Moldavia and Wallachia. The new state, officially named Romania since 1866, gained independence from the Ottoman Empire in 1877. Following World War I after declaring its neutrality in 1914, when Romania fought on the side of the Allied powers starting with 1916, Bukovina, Bessarabia, Transylvania as well as parts of Banat, Cri\u0219ana, and Maramure\u0219 became part of the sovereign Kingdom of Romania. In June\u2013August 1940, as a consequence of the Molotov\u2013Ribbentrop Pact and Second Vienna Award, Romania was compelled to cede Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina to the Soviet Union, and Northern Transylvania to Hungary. In November 1940, Romania signed the Tripartite Pact and, consequently, in June 1941 entered World War II on the Axis side, fighting against the Soviet Union until August 1944, when it joined the Allies and recovered Northern Transylvania. Following the war, under the occupation of the Red Army's forces, Romania became a socialist republic and member of the Warsaw Pact. After the 1989 Revolution, Romania began a transition towards democracy and a market economy.Romania ranks 52nd in the Human Development Index, and is a developing country. It has the world's 47th largest economy by nominal GDP and an annual economic growth rate of 7% (2017), the highest in the EU at the time. Following rapid economic growth in the early 2000s, Romania has an economy predominantly based on services, and is a producer and net exporter of machines and electric energy, featuring companies like Automobile Dacia and OMV Petrom. It has been a member of the United Nations since 1955, part of NATO since 2004, and part of the European Union since 2007. An overwhelming majority of the population identifies themselves as Eastern Orthodox Christians and are native speakers of Romanian, a Romance language.\nThirumazhapadi is a village in the Ariyalur taluk of Ariyalur district, Tamil Nadu, India.\nThe Borta Creek (in Hungarian: Borta-patak) is a tributary of the Mure\u015f River in Transylvania, Romania.\nJacqueline Y. Collins is a Democratic member of the Illinois Senate, representing the 16th district since 2003.\nCamerieri (Waiters) is a 1995 Italian comedy-drama film written and directed by Leone Pompucci. The film won two Silver Ribbons, for best screenplay and best supporting actress (to Regina Bianchi).\nTrabzon (Turkish pronunciation: [\u02c8t\u027eabzon]), historically known as Trebizond, is a city on the Black Sea coast of northeastern Turkey and the capital of Trabzon Province. Trabzon, located on the historical Silk Road, became a melting pot of religions, languages and culture for centuries and a trade gateway to Persia in the southeast and the Caucasus to the northeast. The Venetian and Genoese merchants paid visits to Trebizond during the medieval period and sold silk, linen and woolen fabric.Both republics had merchant colonies within the city \u2013 Leonkastron and the former 'Venetian castle \u2013 that played a role to Trebizond similar to the one Galata played to Constantinople (modern Istanbul). Trabzon formed the basis of several states in its long history and was the capital city of the Empire of Trebizond between 1204 and 1461. During the early modern period, Trabzon, because of the importance of its port, again became a focal point of trade to Persia and the Caucasus.\nThe Black Sea is a body of water and marginal sea of the Atlantic Ocean between the Balkans, Eastern Europe, the Caucasus, and Western Asia. It is supplied by a number of major rivers, such as the Danube,  Dnieper, Southern Bug, Dniester, Don, and the  Rioni. Areas of many countries drain into the Black Sea, including Austria, Belarus, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, the Czech Republic, Georgia, Germany, Hungary, Moldova, Poland, Romania, Russia, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Turkey and Ukraine.The Black Sea has an area of 436,400 km2 (168,500 sq mi) (not including the Sea of Azov), a maximum depth of 2,212 m (7,257 ft), and a volume of 547,000 km3 (131,000 cu mi). It is constrained by the Pontic Mountains to the south, Caucasus Mountains to the east, Crimean Mountains to the north, Strandzha to the southwest, Dobrogea Plateau to the northwest, and features a wide shelf to the northwest.The longest east\u2013west extent is about 1,175 km (730 mi).Important cities along the coast include Burgas, Varna, Constan\u021ba, Odessa, Sevastopol, Yalta, Kerch, Gelendzhik, Novorossiysk, Sochi, Sukhumi, Poti, Batumi, Rize, Trabzon, Giresun, Ordu, Samsun, Zonguldak, and Istanbul, .The Black Sea is bordered by Ukraine, Romania, Bulgaria, Turkey, Georgia, and Russia. It has a positive water balance; that is, a net outflow of water 300 km3 (72 cu mi) per year through the Bosphorus and the Dardanelles into the Aegean Sea. There is a two-way hydrological exchange: the more saline and therefore denser, but warmer, Mediterranean water flows into the Black Sea under its less saline outflow. This creates a significant  anoxic layer well below the surface waters. The Black Sea drains into the Mediterranean Sea, via the Aegean Sea and various straits, and is navigable to the Atlantic Ocean. The Bosphorus Strait connects it to the Sea of Marmara, and the Strait of the Dardanelles connects that sea to the Aegean Sea region of the Mediterranean. These waters separate parts of Eastern Europe from the Caucasus and Western Asia. The Black Sea is also connected, to the north, to the Sea of Azov by the Strait of Kerch.The water level has varied significantly over geological time. Due to these variations in the water level in the basin, the surrounding shelf and associated aprons have sometimes been dry land. At certain critical water levels it is possible for connections with surrounding water bodies to become established. It is through the most active of these connective routes, the Turkish Straits, that the Black Sea joins the world ocean. When this hydrological link is not present, the Black Sea is an endorheic basin, operating independently of the global ocean system (like the Caspian Sea for example). Currently, the Black Sea water level is relatively high; thus, water is being exchanged with the Mediterranean. The Turkish Straits connect the Black Sea with the Aegean Sea, and comprise the Bosphorus, the Sea of Marmara and the Dardanelles.\n", "path": ["borta creek", "Romania", "black sea", "Trabzon", "trabzon province"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the country location of the replaces of the country location of the located in the administrative terroritorial entity of abdulabad?", "correct_answer": "Soviet Union", "model_answer": " [/INST] The village and municipality of Abdulabad is located in the Hajigabul Rayon (district) of Azerbaijan. Therefore, the country location of Abdulabad is Azerbaijan.\n\nExplan", "context": "Azerbaijan ( (listen) AZ-\u0259r-by-JAHN; Azerbaijani: \u0410\u0437\u04d9\u0440\u0431\u0430\u0458\u04b9\u0430\u043d / Az\u0259rbaycan), officially the Azerbaijan Soviet Socialist Republic (Azerbaijan SSR; Azerbaijani: \u0410\u0437\u04d9\u0440\u0431\u0430\u0458\u04b9\u0430\u043d \u0421\u043e\u0432\u0435\u0442 \u0421\u043e\u0441\u0438\u0430\u043b\u0438\u0441\u0442 \u0420\u0435\u0441\u043f\u0443\u0431\u043b\u0438\u043a\u0430\u0441\u044b / Az\u0259rbaycan Sovet Sosialist Respublikas\u0131, Russian: \u0410\u0437\u0435\u0440\u0431\u0430\u0439\u0434\u0436\u0430\u043d\u0441\u043a\u0430\u044f \u0421\u043e\u0432\u0435\u0442\u0441\u043a\u0430\u044f \u0421\u043e\u0446\u0438\u0430\u043b\u0438\u0441\u0442\u0438\u0447\u0435\u0441\u043a\u0430\u044f \u0420\u0435\u0441\u043f\u0443\u0431\u043b\u0438\u043a\u0430 [\u0410\u0437\u0421\u0421\u0420], romanized: Azerbaydzhanskaya Sovetskaya Sotsialisticheskaya Respublika [AzSSR]), also referred to as Soviet Azerbaijan, was one of the constituent republics of the Soviet Union between 1922 and 1991. Created on 28 April 1920 when Soviet Russia brought pro-Soviet figures to power in the region, the first two years of the Azerbaijani SSR were as an independent country until incorporation into the Transcausasian SFSR, along with the Armenian SSR and the Georgian SSR. In December 1922, the Transcaucasian SFSR became part of the newly established Soviet Union. The Constitution of Azerbaijan SSR was approved by the 9th Extraordinary All-Azerbaijani Congress of Soviets on 14 March 1937. On 5 February 1991, Azerbaijan SSR was renamed the Republic of Azerbaijan according to the Decision No.16-XII of Supreme Soviet of Azerbaijan approving the Decree of the President of Azerbaijan SSR dated 29 November 1990, remaining in the USSR for another period before its independence in October 1991. The Constitution of the Azerbaijan SSR ceased to exist in 1995, upon the adoption of the new Constitution of Azerbaijan.\nThe Soviet Union, officially the  Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR), was a Marxist-Leninist sovereign state in Eurasia that existed from 1922 to 1991. Nominally a union of multiple national Soviet republics, its government and economy were highly centralized. The country was a one-party state, governed by the Communist Party with Moscow as its capital in its largest republic, the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic (Russian SFSR). Other major urban centres were Leningrad, Kiev, Minsk, Tashkent, Alma-Ata, and Novosibirsk. It spanned over 10,000 kilometres (6,200 mi) east to west across 11 time zones, and over 7,200 kilometres (4,500 mi) north to south. It had five climate zones: tundra, taiga, steppes, desert and mountains.The Soviet Union had its roots in the 1917 October Revolution, when the Bolsheviks, led by Vladimir Lenin, overthrew the Russian Provisional Government which had replaced Tsar Nicholas II during World War I. In 1922, the Soviet Union was formed by a treaty which legalized the unification of the Russian, Transcaucasian, Ukrainian and Byelorussian republics that had occurred from 1918. Following Lenin's death in 1924 and a brief power struggle, Joseph Stalin came to power in the mid-1920s. Stalin committed the state's ideology to Marxism\u2013Leninism and constructed a command economy which led to a period of rapid industrialization and collectivization. During his rule, political paranoia fermented and the Great Purge removed Stalin's opponents within and outside of the party via arbitrary arrests and persecutions of many people, resulting in at least 600,000 deaths. In 1933, a major famine struck the country, causing the deaths of 3 to 7 million people.Before the start of World War II in 1939, the Soviets signed the Molotov\u2013Ribbentrop Pact, a non-aggression agreement with Nazi Germany, after which the USSR invaded Poland on 17 September 1939. In June 1941, Germany broke the pact and invaded the Soviet Union, opening the largest and bloodiest theatre of war in history. Soviet war casualties accounted for the highest proportion of the conflict in the effort of acquiring the upper hand over Axis forces at intense battles such as Stalingrad and Kursk. The territories overtaken by the Red Army became satellite states of the Soviet Union. The post-war division of Europe into capitalist and communist halves would lead to increased tensions with the United States-led Western Bloc, known as the Cold War. Stalin died in 1953 and was eventually succeeded by Nikita Khrushchev, who in 1956 denounced Stalin and began the de-Stalinization. The Cuban Missile Crisis occurred during Khrushchev's rule, which was among the many factors that led to his downfall in 1964. In the early 1970s, there was a brief d\u00e9tente of relations with the United States, but tensions resumed with the Soviet\u2013Afghan War in 1979. In 1985, the last Soviet premier, Mikhail Gorbachev, sought to reform and liberalize the economy through his policies of glasnost (openness) and perestroika (restructuring), which caused political instability. In 1989, Soviet satellite states in Eastern Europe overthrew their respective communist governments.As part of an attempt to prevent the country's dissolution due to rising nationalist and separatist movements, a referendum was held in March 1991, boycotted by 3 Soviet republics, that resulted in a majority of participating citizens voting in favor of preserving the union as a renewed federation. Gorbachev's power was greatly diminished after Russian President Boris Yeltsin's high-profile role in facing down a coup d'\u00e9tat attempted by Communist Party hardliners. In late 1991, Gorbachev resigned and the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union met and formally dissolved the Soviet Union. The remaining 12 constituent republics emerged as independent post-Soviet states, with the Russian Federation\u2014formerly the Russian SFSR\u2014assuming the Soviet Union's rights and obligations and being recognized as the successor state.The Soviet Union was a powerhouse of many significant technological achievements and innovations of the 20th century, including the world's first human-made satellite, the first humans in space and the first probe to land on another planet, Venus. The country had the world's second largest economy and the largest standing military in the world. The Soviet Union was recognized as one of the five nuclear weapons states and possessed the largest stockpile of weapons of mass destruction. It was a founding permanent member of the United Nations Security Council as well as a member of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE), the World Federation of Trade Unions (WFTU) and the leading member of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (CMEA) and the Warsaw Pact.\nEverwijn Johan Maarten van der Linden (born 9 March 1969 in Voorburg, Zuid-Holland) is a former rower from the Netherlands, who competed for his native country in two consecutive Summer Olympics, starting in 1996. He won the silver medal in the men's lightweight double sculls event in Atlanta, United States, alongside Pepijn Aardewijn. The pair came in 12th in 2000 in Sydney, Australia.\nFor cities and towns in Iran, see AbdolabadAbdulabad (known as Abdulyan until 2009) is a village and municipality in the Hajigabul Rayon of Azerbaijan.  It has a population of 3,423.\nAzerbaijan (UK:  (listen), US: ; Azerbaijani: Az\u0259rbaycan [\u0251\u02d0z\u00e6\u027eb\u0251j\u02c8d\u0361\u0292\u0251n]), officially the Republic of Azerbaijan (Azerbaijani: Az\u0259rbaycan Respublikas\u0131 [\u0251\u02d0z\u00e6\u027eb\u0251j\u02c8d\u0361\u0292\u0251n \u027eespublik\u0251\u02c8s\u026f]), is a country in the South Caucasus region of Eurasia at the crossroads of Eastern Europe and Western Asia. It is bounded by the Caspian Sea to the east, Russia to the north, Georgia to the northwest, Armenia to the west and Iran to the south. The exclave of Nakhchivan is bounded by Armenia to the north and east, Iran to the south and west, and has an 11 km (6.8 mi) long border with Turkey in the northwest.The Azerbaijan Democratic Republic proclaimed its independence in 1918 and became the first secular democratic Muslim-majority state. In 1920 the country was incorporated into the Soviet Union as the Azerbaijan Soviet Socialist Republic. The modern Republic of Azerbaijan proclaimed its independence on 30 August 1991, shortly before the dissolution of the USSR in the same year. In September 1991, the Armenian majority of the disputed Nagorno-Karabakh region seceded to form the Republic of Artsakh. The region and seven adjacent districts outside it became de facto independent with the end of the Nagorno-Karabakh War in 1994. These regions are internationally recognized as part of Azerbaijan pending a solution to the status of the Nagorno-Karabakh through negotiations facilitated by the OSCE.Azerbaijan is a unitary semi-presidential republic. It is one of six independent Turkic states and an active member of the Turkic Council and the T\u00dcRKSOY community. Azerbaijan has diplomatic relations with 158 countries and holds membership in 38 international organizations, including the United Nations (since 1992), the Council of Europe, the Non-Aligned Movement, the OSCE, and the NATO Partnership for Peace (PfP) program. It is one of the founding members of GUAM, the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) and the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons. Azerbaijan also holds observer status in the World Trade Organization.While more than 89% of the population is Shia Muslim, the Constitution of Azerbaijan does not declare an official religion and all major political forces in the country are secularist. Azerbaijan has a high level of human development that ranks on par with most Eastern European countries. It has a high rate of economic development and literacy, as well as a low rate of unemployment. However, the ruling party, the New Azerbaijan Party, has been accused of authoritarianism and human rights abuses.\nGlen Ogle (Scottish Gaelic: Gleann Ogail) extends 7 miles north westwards from Lochearnhead to Lix Toll, where it opens into Glen Dochart.The Ogle Burn flows within the steep sides of the glen, from the Lochan Lairig Cheile at the glen's head.The military road, which can be seen from the modern road, was built in 1749 by Major William Caulfeild. It was used by the British Army in its efforts to pacify the Highlands after the Jacobite rising of 1745.\nMarko \u0160kop (born 1974 in Pre\u0161ov, Slovakia) is a Slovak film director.He received degrees in journalism at Comenius University in Bratislava in 1996 and in film directing at the Academy of Performing Arts in Bratislava in 2001. He gained his PhD in Mass Media from the Faculty of Philosophy at Comenius University in Bratislava in 2005.\nHajigabul - (Azerbaijani: Hac\u0131qabul) is one of the districts of Azerbaijan established in 1990 by the decision of the Supreme Council of the Republic. The district is bordered by Absheron, Gobustan, Shamax\u0131, Aghsu, Kurdamir, Sabirabad, Salyan, and Shirvan city.\nStaynovtsi is a village in Tryavna Municipality, in Gabrovo Province, in northern central Bulgaria.\n", "path": ["abdulabad", "hajigabul", "Azerbaijan", "Azerbaijan Soviet Socialist Republic", "Soviet Union"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the currency of the indigenous to of the official language of the country location of kcaq?", "correct_answer": "pound sterling", "model_answer": " [/INST] The currency of the country location of KCAQ is the United States dollar (USD). The United States is the country where KCAQ is a commercial radio station licensed to serve the Ventura County, California area. The US dollar is the", "context": "The Shimanek Bridge is a covered bridge near Scio in Linn County in the U.S. state of Oregon.  It was added to the National Register of Historic Places as Thomas Creek \u2013 Shimanek Covered Bridge in 1987.The bridge, 130 feet (40 m) long, was completed in 1966. Replacing a similar structure severely damaged by the Columbus Day Storm of 1962, it is the fifth bridge at this location. The fourth bridge had been built in 1927, and the first is thought to have dated to 1861.Carrying Richardson Gap Road, the bridge crosses Thomas Creek about 2 miles (3 km) east of Scio. It is the longest covered bridge in Linn County and the newest. A county crew renovated the structure in 2002, repairing damage caused by a flood in 1996.In November 2015, the bridge was closed for repairs after an inspection revealed \"serious decay\". Temporary repairs were expected to take weeks. More substantial repairs may not occur for up to two years, depending on funding.\nKCAQ (95.9 FM, \"Q95.9\") is a commercial radio station that is licensed to Camarillo, California and serves the Ventura County, California area. The station is owned by Gold Coast Broadcasting and airs a rhythmic contemporary music format. KCAQ is simulcast on AM sister station KKZZ (1520 AM) in Port Hueneme, California.\nThe pound sterling (symbol: \u00a3; ISO code: GBP), commonly known as the pound and less commonly referred to as sterling, is the official currency of the United Kingdom, Jersey, Guernsey, the Isle of Man, South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands, the British Antarctic Territory, and Tristan da Cunha. It is subdivided into 100 pence (singular: penny, abbreviated: p). A number of nations that do not use sterling also have currencies called the pound.Sterling is the fourth most-traded currency in the foreign exchange market, after the United States dollar, the euro, and the Japanese yen. Together with those three currencies and the Chinese yuan, it forms the basket of currencies which calculate the value of IMF special drawing rights. Sterling is also the third most-held reserve currency in global reserves (about 4 per cent).The British Crown dependencies of Guernsey, Jersey and the Isle of Man produce their own local issues of sterling (the Guernsey pound, the Jersey pound and the Manx pound) which are considered fully equivalent to UK sterling in their respective regions. The pound sterling is also used in Gibraltar (alongside the Gibraltar pound), the Falkland Islands (alongside the Falkland Islands pound), Saint Helena and Ascension Island in Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha (alongside the Saint Helena pound). The Bank of England is the central bank for the pound sterling, issuing its own banknotes, and regulating issuance of banknotes by private banks in Scotland and Northern Ireland. Banknotes issued by other jurisdictions are not regulated by the Bank of England; local governments use Bank of England notes as backing for local issuance by allowing them to be exchanged 1:1 at face value.\nThomas William Brown (born December 24, 1963) is a former professional American football player for the National Football League's Cincinnati Bengals. He played in just two games in the 1987 season after his collegiate career at Augustana College in South Dakota.\nDon Libes is a computer scientist at NIST performing computer science research on interoperability.  He works in the Manufacturing Systems Integration Division, which performs research on software integration methods, creating custom software that implements draft standards and serves as an interface to other components provided by separate vendors.Libes is responsible for numerous implementations of STEP, a family of ISO standards and draft standards for product management.  He is the creator of the NIST Identifier Collaboration Service, a free service to allow collaborative management of unmanaged namespaces.  Libes is also responsible for one of the earliest network-shared memory ports on UNIX and the first port of XINU on UNIX.Libes's book Obfuscated C Code and Other Mysteries explains the winning entries in the Obfuscated C Code Contest, as an educational tool.Libes is best known for Expect, which is public domain software for automating and testing interactive applications such as Telnet, FTP, passwd and hundreds of other programs that have no internal control language (or too limited of a control language) of their own.  Libes also developed Expectk, which glues Expect to Tk thereby allowing a character-graphic or line-oriented program to be entirely hidden with a modern graphical user interface.Expect has been successively ported to Perl(expect.pm), Python(pexpect) and Java(expect4j): the aforementioned ports are all open source and are as such subject to caution concerning their conformity to Libes' original software.  Massive network automation with the original language or these variants is patent within many ISP's autonomous systems worldwide - the tectonic plates of the Internet, and also within large national and international corporate networks.\nThe United States of America (USA), commonly known as the United States (U.S. or US) or America, is a country comprising 50 states, a federal district, five major self-governing territories, and various possessions. At 3.8 million sq mi (9.8 million km2), the United States is the world's third or fourth largest country by total area and is slightly smaller than the entire continent of Europe's 3.93 million sq mi (10.2 million km2). With a population of more than 327 million people, the U.S. is the third most populous country. Most of the country is located contiguously in North America between Canada and Mexico. The extremely diverse geography, climate, and wildlife of the United States make it one of the world's 17 megadiverse countries.Paleo-Indians migrated from Siberia to the North American mainland at least 12,000 years ago. European colonization began in the 16th century. The United States emerged from the thirteen British colonies established along the East Coast. Following the French and Indian War, numerous disputes between Great Britain and the colonies led to the American Revolution, which began in 1775, and the subsequent Declaration of Independence in 1776. The war ended in 1783 with the United States becoming the first country to gain independence from a European power. The current constitution was adopted in 1788, with the first ten amendments, collectively named the Bill of Rights, being ratified in 1791 to guarantee many fundamental civil liberties. The United States embarked on a vigorous expansion across North America throughout the 19th century, acquiring new territories, displacing Native American tribes, and gradually admitting new states until it spanned the continent by 1848.During the second half of the 19th century, the Civil War led to the abolition of slavery. By the end of the century, the United States had extended into the Pacific Ocean, and its economy, driven in large part by the Industrial Revolution, began to soar. The Spanish\u2013American War and World War I confirmed the country's status as a global military power. The United States emerged from World War II as a global superpower and a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council. The end of the Cold War and the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 left the United States as the world's sole superpower.The United States is a federal republic and a representative democracy. It is a founding member of the United Nations, World Bank, International Monetary Fund, Organization of American States (OAS), and many other international organizations. The United States is a highly developed country, with the world's largest economy by nominal GDP and second-largest economy by PPP, accounting for approximately a quarter of global GDP. The U.S. economy is largely post-industrial, characterized by the dominance of services and knowledge-based activities, although the manufacturing sector remains the second-largest in the world. The United States is the world's largest importer and the second largest exporter of goods, by value. Although its population is only 4.3% of the world total, the U.S. holds 31% of the total wealth in the world, the largest share of global wealth concentrated in a single country.Despite income and wealth disparities, the United States continues to rank very high in measures of socioeconomic performance, including average wage, human development, per capita GDP, and worker productivity. The United States is the foremost military power in the world, making up a third of global military spending, and is a leading political, cultural, and scientific force internationally.\nEngland is a country that is part of the United Kingdom. It shares land borders with Wales to the west and Scotland to the north. The Irish Sea lies west of England and the Celtic Sea to the southwest. England is separated from continental Europe by the North Sea to the east and the English Channel to the south. The country covers five-eighths of the island of Great Britain, which lies in the North Atlantic, and includes over 100 smaller islands, such as the Isles of Scilly and the Isle of Wight.The area now called England was first inhabited by modern humans during the Upper Palaeolithic period, but takes its name from the Angles, a Germanic tribe deriving its name from the Anglia peninsula, who settled during the 5th and 6th centuries. England became a unified state in the 10th century, and since the Age of Discovery, which began during the 15th century, has had a significant cultural and legal impact on the wider world. The English language, the Anglican Church, and English law \u2013 the basis for the common law legal systems of many other countries around the world \u2013 developed in England, and the country's parliamentary system of government has been widely adopted by other nations. The Industrial Revolution began in 18th-century England, transforming its society into the world's first industrialised nation.England's terrain is chiefly low hills and plains, especially in central and southern England. However, there is upland and mountainous terrain in the north (for example, the Lake District and Pennines) and in the west (for example, Dartmoor and the Shropshire Hills). The capital is London, which has the largest metropolitan area in both the United Kingdom and the European Union. England's population of over 55 million comprises 84% of the population of the United Kingdom, largely concentrated around London, the South East, and conurbations in the Midlands, the North West, the North East, and Yorkshire, which each developed as major industrial regions during the 19th century.The Kingdom of England \u2013 which after 1535 included Wales \u2013 ceased being a separate sovereign state on 1 May 1707, when the Acts of Union put into effect the terms agreed in the Treaty of Union the previous year, resulting in a political union with the Kingdom of Scotland to create the Kingdom of Great Britain. In 1801, Great Britain was united with the Kingdom of Ireland (through another Act of Union) to become the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland. In 1922 the Irish Free State seceded from the United Kingdom, leading to the latter being renamed the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.\nEnglish is a West Germanic language that was first spoken in early medieval England and eventually became a global lingua franca. It is named after the Angles, one of the Germanic tribes that migrated to the area of Great Britain that later took their name, as England. Both names derive from Anglia, a peninsula in the Baltic Sea. The language is closely related to Frisian and Low Saxon, and its vocabulary has been significantly influenced by other Germanic languages, particularly Norse (a North Germanic language), and to a greater extent by Latin and French.English has developed over the course of more than 1,400 years. The earliest forms of English, a group of West Germanic (Ingvaeonic) dialects brought to Great Britain by Anglo-Saxon settlers in the 5th century, are collectively called Old English. Middle English began in the late 11th century with the Norman conquest of England; this was a period in which the language was influenced by French. Early Modern English began in the late 15th century with the introduction of the printing press to London, the printing of the King James Bible and the start of the Great Vowel Shift.Through the worldwide influence of the British Empire, and later the United States, Modern English has been spreading around the world since the 17th century. Through all types of printed and electronic media, and spurred by the emergence of the United States as a global superpower, English has become the leading language of international discourse and the lingua franca in many regions and professional contexts such as science, navigation and law.English is the largest language by number of speakers, and the third most-spoken native language in the world, after Standard Chinese and Spanish. It is the most widely learned second language and is either the official language or one of the official languages in almost 60 sovereign states. There are more people who have learned it as a second language than there are native speakers. It is estimated that there are over 2 billion speakers of English. English is the most commonly spoken language in the United Kingdom, the United States, Canada, Australia, Ireland and New Zealand, and it is widely spoken in some areas of the Caribbean, Africa and South Asia. It is a co-official language of the United Nations, the European Union and many other world and regional international organisations. It is the most widely spoken Germanic language, accounting for at least 70% of speakers of this Indo-European branch. English has a vast vocabulary, though counting how many words any language has is impossible. English speakers are called \"Anglophones\".Modern English grammar is the result of a gradual change from a typical Indo-European dependent marking pattern, with a rich inflectional morphology and relatively free word order, to a mostly analytic pattern with little inflection, a fairly fixed SVO word order and a complex syntax. Modern English relies more on auxiliary verbs and word order for the expression of complex tenses, aspect and mood, as well as passive constructions, interrogatives and some negation. The variation among the accents and dialects of English used in different countries and regions\u2014in terms of phonetics and phonology, and sometimes also vocabulary, grammar, and spelling\u2014can often be understood by speakers of different dialects, but in extreme cases can lead to confusion or even mutual unintelligibility between English speakers.\nRichard Kahan (born May 15, 1980) is a Canadian television actor and writer. Born in Winnipeg, Manitoba, he is known for his role as Marco Pacella in the television series The 4400 and for his role as Gil Kurvers on the Canadian television series teen soap Edgemont.\n", "path": ["kcaq", "United States of America", "English", "England", "pound sterling"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the headquarters location of the regulated by of the sport of alfred delcourt?", "correct_answer": "Z\u00fcrich", "model_answer": " [/INST] The headquarters location of the organization that regulates the sport where Alfred Delcourt served as a referee is the International Federation of Association Football (FIFA). However, it is important to clarify that FIFA is not the regulator of referees", "context": "Bulz, also called urs de m\u0103m\u0103lig\u0103, is a Romanian dish composed by roasting m\u0103m\u0103lig\u0103 and cheese in an oven. Bulz is often eaten with sm\u00e2nt\u00e2n\u0103.In June 2010, the town of Covasna established the record of the biggest bulz of the world with a length of 50 meters. This record was recognized by Guinness World Records.\nAlyosha Kravinoff, also known as the second Kraven the Hunter, is a fictional character appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics. He is the illegitimate son of Kraven the Hunter, the nephew of Chameleon, and the half-brother of Vladimir Kravinoff and Ana Kravinoff.\nAssociation football, more commonly known as football or soccer, is a team sport played with a spherical ball between two teams of eleven players. It is played by 250 million players in over 200 countries and dependencies, making it the world's most popular sport. The game is played on a rectangular field called a pitch with a goal at each end. The object of the game is to score by moving the ball beyond the goal line into the opposing goal.Association football is one of a family of football codes, which emerged from various ball games played worldwide since antiquity. The modern game traces its origins to 1863 when the Laws of the Game were originally codified in England by The Football Association.Players are not allowed to touch the ball with hands or arms while it is in play, except for the goalkeepers within the penalty area. Other players mainly use their feet to strike or pass the ball, but may also use any other part of their body except the hands and the arms. The team that scores most goals by the end of the match wins. If the score is level at the end of the game, either a draw is declared or the game goes into extra time or a penalty shootout depending on the format of the competition. Association football is governed internationally by the International Federation of Association Football (FIFA; French: F\u00e9d\u00e9ration Internationale de Football Association), which organises World Cups for both men and women every four years.\nZ\u00fcrich or Zurich ( ZEWR-ik; see below for other names) is the largest city in Switzerland and the capital of the canton of Z\u00fcrich. It is located in north-central Switzerland at the northwestern tip of Lake Z\u00fcrich. The municipality has approximately 409,000 inhabitants, the urban agglomeration 1.315 million and the Z\u00fcrich metropolitan area 1.83 million. Z\u00fcrich is a hub for railways, roads, and air traffic. Both Zurich Airport and railway station are the largest and busiest in the country.Permanently settled for over 2,000 years, Z\u00fcrich was founded by the Romans, who, in 15 BC, called it Turicum. However, early settlements have been found dating back more than 6,400 years ago. During the Middle Ages, Z\u00fcrich gained the independent and privileged status of imperial immediacy and, in 1519, became a primary centre of the Protestant Reformation in Europe under the leadership of Huldrych Zwingli.The official language of Z\u00fcrich is German, but the main spoken language is the local variant of the Alemannic Swiss German dialect, Z\u00fcrich German.Many museums and art galleries can be found in the city, including the Swiss National Museum and the Kunsthaus. Schauspielhaus Z\u00fcrich is one of the most important theatres in the German-speaking world.Z\u00fcrich is a leading global city and among the world's largest financial centres despite having a relatively small population. The city is home to a large number of financial institutions and banking companies. Most of Switzerland's research and development centres are concentrated in Z\u00fcrich and the low tax rates attract overseas companies to set up their headquarters there.Monocle's 2012 \"Quality of Life Survey\" ranked Z\u00fcrich first on a list of the top 25 cities in the world \"to make a base within\". According to several surveys from 2006 to 2008, Z\u00fcrich was named the city with the best quality of life in the world as well as the wealthiest city in Europe in terms of GDP per capita.\nThe F\u00e9d\u00e9ration Internationale de Football Association (FIFA  FEEF-\u0259; French for International Federation of Association Football, Spanish: Federaci\u00f3n Internacionalde F\u00fatbol Asociaci\u00f3n, German: Internationaler Verband des Association Football) is a non-profit organization which describes itself as an international governing body of association football, f\u00fatsal, beach soccer, and efootball. It is the highest governing body of football.FIFA was founded in 1904 to oversee international competition among the national associations of Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, the Netherlands, Spain, Sweden, and Switzerland. Headquartered in Z\u00fcrich, its membership now comprises 211 national associations. Member countries must each also be members of one of the six regional confederations into which the world is divided: Africa, Asia, Europe, North & Central America and the Caribbean, Oceania, and South America.Today, FIFA outlines a number of objectives in the organizational Statues, including growing football internationally, providing efforts to ensure football is accessible to everyone, and advocating for integrity and fair play. FIFA is responsible for the organization and promotion of football's major international tournaments, notably the World Cup which commenced in 1930 and the Women's World Cup which commenced in 1991. Although FIFA does not solely set the rules of football, that being the responsibility of the International Football Association Board of which FIFA is a member, it applies and enforces the rules across all FIFA competitions. All FIFA tournaments generate revenue from sponsorship; in 2018, FIFA had revenues of over US $4.6 billion, ending the 2015-2018 cycle with a net positive of US $1.2 billion, and had cash reserves of over US $2.7 billion. Reports by investigative journalists have linked FIFA leadership with corruption, bribery, and vote-rigging related to the election of FIFA president Sepp Blatter and the organization's decision to award the 2018 and 2022 World Cups to Russia and Qatar, respectively. These allegations led to the indictments of nine high-ranking FIFA officials and five corporate executives by the U.S. Department of Justice on charges including racketeering, wire fraud, and money laundering. On 27 May 2015, several of these officials were arrested by Swiss authorities, who were launching a simultaneous but separate criminal investigation into how the organization awarded the 2018 and 2022 World Cups. Those among these officials who were also indicted in the U.S. are expected to be extradited to face charges there as well. Many officials were suspended by FIFA's ethics committee including Sepp Blatter and Michel Platini. In early 2017 reports became public about FIFA president Gianni Infantino attempting to prevent the re-elections of both chairmen of the ethics committee, Cornel Borb\u00e9ly and Hans-Joachim Eckert, during the FIFA congress in May 2017. On May 9, 2017, following Infantino's proposal, FIFA Council decided not to renew the mandates of Borb\u00e9ly and Eckert. Together with the chairmen, 11 of 13 committee members were removed.\nSpruce View is a hamlet in central Alberta, Canada within Red Deer County.  It is located on Highway 54, approximately 30 kilometres (19 mi) west of Innisfail. Spruce View is also recognized by Statistics Canada as a designated place.\nAlfred Delcourt (17 January 1929 \u2013 12 December 2012) was a Belgian football referee.\nSarpsborgavisa (also SarpsborgAvisa) was a free newspaper published in Sarpsborg, Norway.It was owned by Mediehuset \u00d8stfold, which is owned 99.3% by Edda Media.It was closed from 31 May 2009.\n", "path": ["alfred delcourt", "association football", "FIFA", "Z\u00fcrich"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the named after of the country location of lucon?", "correct_answer": "franks", "model_answer": " [/INST] The name Lucon is derived from the Latin term \"Luctunus,\" which means \"fortified place\" or \"stronghold.\" The town likely got its name due to the fortifications that were built there during ancient times to protect against invas", "context": "France (French: [f\u0281\u0251\u0303s]), officially the French Republic (French: R\u00e9publique fran\u00e7aise, pronounced [\u0281epyblik f\u0281\u0251\u0303s\u025b\u02d0z]), is a sovereign state whose territory consists of metropolitan France in Western Europe and several overseas regions and territories. The metropolitan area of France extends from the Mediterranean Sea to the English Channel and the North Sea, and from the Rhine to the Atlantic Ocean. It is bordered by Belgium, Luxembourg and Germany to the northeast, Switzerland and Italy to the east, and Andorra and Spain to the south. The overseas territories include French Guiana in South America and several islands in the Atlantic, Pacific and Indian oceans. The country's 18 integral regions (five of which are situated overseas) span a combined area of 643,801 square kilometres (248,573 sq mi) and a total population of 67.0 million (as of July 2019). France is a unitary semi-presidential republic with its capital in Paris, the country's largest city and main cultural and commercial centre. Other major urban areas include Lyon, Marseille, Toulouse, Bordeaux, Lille and Nice.During the Iron Age, what is now metropolitan France was inhabited by the Gauls, a Celtic people. Rome annexed the area in 51 BC, holding it until the arrival of Germanic Franks in 476, who formed the Kingdom of Francia. The Treaty of Verdun of 843 partitioned Francia into East Francia, Middle Francia and West Francia. West Francia, which became the Kingdom of France in 987, emerged as a major European power in the Late Middle Ages, following its victory in the Hundred Years' War (1337\u20131453). During the Renaissance, French culture flourished and a global colonial empire was established, which by the 20th century would become the second largest in the world. The 16th century was dominated by religious civil wars between Catholics and Protestants (Huguenots). France became Europe's dominant cultural, political, and military power in the 17th century under Louis XIV. In the late 18th century, the French Revolution overthrew the absolute monarchy, establishing one of modern history's earliest republics and drafting the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen, which expresses the nation's ideals to this day.In the 19th century, Napoleon took power and established the First French Empire. His subsequent Napoleonic Wars (1803\u201315) shaped the course of continental Europe. Following the collapse of the Empire, France endured a tumultuous succession of governments culminating with the establishment of the French Third Republic in 1870. France was a major participant in World War I, from which it emerged victorious, and was one of the Allies in World War II, but came under occupation by the Axis powers in 1940. Following liberation in 1944, a Fourth Republic was established and later dissolved in the course of the Algerian War. The Fifth Republic, led by Charles de Gaulle, was formed in 1958 and remains today. Algeria and nearly all the other colonies became independent in the 1960s, with most retaining close economic and military connections with France.France has long been a global centre of art, science, and philosophy. It hosts the world's fourth-largest number of UNESCO World Heritage Sites and is the leading tourist destination, receiving around 83 million foreign visitors annually. France is a developed country with the world's sixth-largest economy by nominal GDP, and tenth-largest by purchasing power parity. In terms of aggregate household wealth, it ranks fourth in the world. France performs well in international rankings of education, health care, life expectancy, and human development. France is considered a great power in global affairs, being one of the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council with the power to veto and an official nuclear-weapon state. It is a leading member state of the European Union and the Eurozone, and a member of the Group of 7, North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), the World Trade Organization (WTO), and La Francophonie.\nOru Theruvinte Katha (English: The Story of a Street) is a Malayalam novel written by S. K. Pottekkatt and published in 1960. It sketches a host of characters who spend their lives making a living in \u2018The Street\u2019. However the central character can be discerned as Krishnakuruppu, who is mostly addressed as 'Kuruppu', 'Paper Kuruppu' and even 'Vishamasthithi' due to his usage of the phrase 'Kaaryam Vishamasthithi' (Malayalam: \u0d15\u0d3e\u0d30\u0d4d\u0d2f\u0d02 \u0d35\u0d3f\u0d37\u0d2e\u0d38\u0d4d\u0d25\u0d3f\u0d24\u0d3f) or 'situation is difficult' in English when calling out headlines while selling news papers. Some of the minor characters are introduced to the reader through Kuruppu, where he is shown to be in conversation about them with other prominent characters of the street. The street is based on the S.M. Street or popularly known as Mithai theruvu (Sweet Meat Street) in Kozhikode, Kerala. It won the Kerala Sahitya Academy Award of 1961.\nAustin Motor Company's small straight-4 automobile engine, the A series, is one of the most common in the world. Launched in 1951 with the Austin A30, production lasted until 2000 in the Mini. It used a cast-iron block and cylinder head, and a steel crankshaft with 3 main bearings. The camshaft ran in the cylinder block, driven by a single-row chain for most applications, and with tappets sliding in the block, accessible through pressed steel side covers for most applications, and with overhead valves operated through rockers. The cylinder head for the overhead-valve version of the A-series engine was designed by Harry Weslake \u2013 a cylinder head specialist famed for his involvement in SS (Jaguar) engines and several F1-title winning engines. Although a 'clean sheet' design the A series owed much to established Austin engine design practise, resembling in general design (including the Weslake head) and overall appearance a scaled-down version of the 1200cc overhead-valve engine first seen in the Austin A40 Devon which would form the basis of the later B-series engine.The A-series design was licensed by Nissan of Japan, along with other Austin designs. Improvements were rapid. An early change was to incorporate a 5 main bearing crank. The cylinder head was modified for the first of the E series by swapping plugs and ports, plugs fitted between pushrods and 8 ports eliminated the Siamesed inlet and exhaust ports. Nissan modified the design into the later Nissan A engine that was launched in 1966 with an aluminium head and wedge combustion chambers. It became the basis for many of their following engines notably the later OHC Nissan E engine, was scaled up into Nissan CA engine and ultimately the DOHC 170 bhp (127 kW) CA18DET. All these engines show their lineage by the characteristic un-skirted crankcase block of the BMC A series, but with the A and E having the camshaft moved to the right side allowing greater port areas, and a mounting on the right wall of the crankcase for the oil pump whereas the BMC A series had the oil pump at the back end of the left-side camshaft.\nLu\u00e7on (pronounced [lys\u0254\u0303]) is a commune in the Vend\u00e9e department in the Pays de la Loire region in western France. Its inhabitants are known as Lu\u00e7onnais.Lu\u00e7on Cathedral is the seat of the Diocese of Lu\u00e7on (comprising the Vend\u00e9e), where Cardinal Richelieu once served as bishop.\nKazuki Akane (\u8d64\u6839 \u548c\u6a39, Akane Kazuki, born March 24, 1962, in Osaka, Osaka Prefecture) is a Japanese director of Japanese animation. Until the early 2000s, he was a staff member of the anime studio Sunrise, where he collaborated with Shoji Kawamori to direct his most famous work, The Vision of Escaflowne. Since that time, he worked extensively with Satelight (and occasionally again with Kawamori, who is the studio's executive director) before going freelance once more to direct the Birdy the Mighty TV series, among other projects.\nThe Franks (Latin: Franci or gens Francorum) were a collection of Germanic peoples, whose name was first mentioned in 3rd century Roman sources, associated with tribes on the Lower and Middle Rhine, on the edge of the Roman Empire. Later the term was associated with later Romanized Germanic dynasties within the collapsing Western Roman Empire, who eventually commanded the whole region between the rivers Loire and Rhine. They then imposed power over many other post-Roman kingdoms and Germanic peoples, and still later they were given recognition by the Catholic Church as successors to the old rulers of the Western Roman Empire.Although the Frankish name does not appear until the 3rd century, at least some of the original Frankish tribes had long been known to the Romans under their own names, both as allies providing soldiers and as enemies. The new name first appears when the Romans and their allies were losing control of the Rhine region. The Franks were first reported as working together to raid Roman territory, but from the beginning these raids were associated with attacks upon them from outside their frontier area, by the Saxons, for example, and with the desire of frontier tribes to move into Roman territory with which they had had centuries of close contact.Frankish peoples inside Rome's frontier on the Rhine river were the Salian Franks who from their first appearance were permitted to live in Roman territory, and the Ripuarian or Rhineland Franks who, after many attempts, eventually conquered the Roman frontier city of Cologne and took control of the left bank of the Rhine. Later, in a period of factional conflict in the 450s and 460s, Childeric I, a Frank, was one of several military leaders commanding Roman forces with various ethnic affiliations in Roman Gaul (roughly modern France). Childeric and his son Clovis I faced competition from the Roman Aegidius as competitor for the \"kingship\" of the Franks associated with the Roman Loire forces. (According to Gregory of Tours, Aegidius held the kingship of the Franks for 8 years while Childeric was in exile.) This new type of kingship, perhaps inspired by Alaric I, represents the start of the Merovingian dynasty, which succeeded in conquering most of Gaul in the 6th century, as well as establishing its leadership over all the Frankish kingdoms on the Rhine frontier. It was on the basis of this Merovingian empire that the resurgent Carolingians eventually came to be seen as the new Emperors of Western Europe in 800.In the Middle Ages, the term Frank came to be used as a synonym for Western European, as the Carolingian Franks were rulers of most of Western Europe, and established a political order that was the basis of the European ancien regime that only ended with the French revolution. Western Europeans shared their allegiance to the Roman Catholic church and worked as allies in the Crusades beyond Europe in the Levant, where they still referred to themselves and the Principalities they established as Frankish. This has had a lasting impact on names for Western Europeans in many languages.From the beginning the Frankish kingdoms were politically and legally divided between an eastern Frankish and Germanic part, and the western part that the Merovingians had founded on Roman soil. The eastern Frankish kingdom came to be seen as the new \"Holy Roman Empire\", and was from early times occasionally called \"Germany\". Within \"Frankish\" Western Europe itself, it was the original Merovingian or \"Salian\" Western Frankish kingdom, founded in Roman Gaul and speaking Romance languages, which has continued until today to be referred to as \"France\" \u2013 a name derived directly from the Franks.\nLeah Galton (born 24 May 1994) is an English footballer who currently plays as a forward for FA WSL club Manchester United.She has previously played for Sky Blue FC in the NWSL, Bayern Munich in Germany, and has represented England from under-15 to under-23 level.\n", "path": ["lucon", "France", "franks"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the country location of citizenship of elvir muriqi?", "correct_answer": "United States of America", "model_answer": " [/INST] Answer: Elvir Muriqi is an Albanian American boxer.\n\nExplanation: Elvir Muriqi is born in April 29, 1979 and is a boxer. He is", "context": "Elvir Muriqi (born April 29, 1979) is an Albanian American boxer.\nThe United States of America (USA), commonly known as the United States (U.S. or US) or America, is a country comprising 50 states, a federal district, five major self-governing territories, and various possessions. At 3.8 million sq mi (9.8 million km2), the United States is the world's third or fourth largest country by total area and is slightly smaller than the entire continent of Europe's 3.93 million sq mi (10.2 million km2). With a population of more than 327 million people, the U.S. is the third most populous country. Most of the country is located contiguously in North America between Canada and Mexico. The extremely diverse geography, climate, and wildlife of the United States make it one of the world's 17 megadiverse countries.Paleo-Indians migrated from Siberia to the North American mainland at least 12,000 years ago. European colonization began in the 16th century. The United States emerged from the thirteen British colonies established along the East Coast. Following the French and Indian War, numerous disputes between Great Britain and the colonies led to the American Revolution, which began in 1775, and the subsequent Declaration of Independence in 1776. The war ended in 1783 with the United States becoming the first country to gain independence from a European power. The current constitution was adopted in 1788, with the first ten amendments, collectively named the Bill of Rights, being ratified in 1791 to guarantee many fundamental civil liberties. The United States embarked on a vigorous expansion across North America throughout the 19th century, acquiring new territories, displacing Native American tribes, and gradually admitting new states until it spanned the continent by 1848.During the second half of the 19th century, the Civil War led to the abolition of slavery. By the end of the century, the United States had extended into the Pacific Ocean, and its economy, driven in large part by the Industrial Revolution, began to soar. The Spanish\u2013American War and World War I confirmed the country's status as a global military power. The United States emerged from World War II as a global superpower and a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council. The end of the Cold War and the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 left the United States as the world's sole superpower.The United States is a federal republic and a representative democracy. It is a founding member of the United Nations, World Bank, International Monetary Fund, Organization of American States (OAS), and many other international organizations. The United States is a highly developed country, with the world's largest economy by nominal GDP and second-largest economy by PPP, accounting for approximately a quarter of global GDP. The U.S. economy is largely post-industrial, characterized by the dominance of services and knowledge-based activities, although the manufacturing sector remains the second-largest in the world. The United States is the world's largest importer and the second largest exporter of goods, by value. Although its population is only 4.3% of the world total, the U.S. holds 31% of the total wealth in the world, the largest share of global wealth concentrated in a single country.Despite income and wealth disparities, the United States continues to rank very high in measures of socioeconomic performance, including average wage, human development, per capita GDP, and worker productivity. The United States is the foremost military power in the world, making up a third of global military spending, and is a leading political, cultural, and scientific force internationally.\nPiyapan Choopetch (Thai: \u0e1b\u0e34\u0e22\u0e30\u0e1e\u0e31\u0e19\u0e18\u0e4c \u0e0a\u0e39\u0e40\u0e1e\u0e47\u0e0a\u0e23\u0e4c) is a Thai film director and screenwriter. His films include Necromancer and Vow of Death.\nCalosima fallaciae is a moth in the Blastobasidae family which is endemic to Costa Rica.\n10:20 is the third album by British indie rock band The Twang, released on 29 October 2012.\nPowermad is an American speed metal band, formed in Minneapolis in 1984. The group has been called \"An innovative and often forgotten speed metal band...who infused progressive metal styles and European styles into abstract American speed metal.\" The band's intricate riff formulations were heavily influenced by thrash metal acts like Metallica and Testament. Vocalist Joel DuBay's singing is easily recognizable with his mixture of singing and high screams.\n", "path": ["elvir muriqi", "United States of America"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the replaces of the place of birth of the country location of the located in the administrative terroritorial entity of tibbi rang?", "correct_answer": "the thirteen colonies", "model_answer": " [/INST] The place of birth of the country of Martha Maria Yeardley Smith is Paris, France. However, the context does not provide information about the location of Tibbi Rang. Tibbi Rang is a village in the Firozpur district of Pun", "context": "The Squiala First Nation or Squiala Indian Band is a band government of the Sto:lo people located in the Upper Fraser Valley region, near Chilliwack, British Columbia, Canada.  They are a member government of the Sto:lo Nation tribal council.\nThis is a list of the National Register of Historic Places listings in Darke County, Ohio.This is intended to be a complete list of the properties and districts on the National Register of Historic Places in Darke County, Ohio, United States.  The locations of National Register properties and districts for which the latitude and longitude coordinates are included below, may be seen in a Google map.There are 26 properties and districts listed on the National Register in the county.This National Park Service list is complete through NPS recent listings posted July 18, 2019.\nMartha Maria Yeardley Smith ( YARD-lee; born July 3, 1964) is an American actress, voice actress, comedian, writer and artist. Smith is known for her long-running role as Lisa Simpson on the animated television series The Simpsons.She was born in Paris on July 3, 1964 and moved with her family to Washington, D.C., in 1966. As a child, Smith was often teased because of her voice. She became a professional actress in 1982 after graduating from drama school and moved to New York City in 1984, where she appeared in the Broadway production of Tom Stoppard's The Real Thing. She made her film debut in 1985's Heaven Help Us, followed by roles in The Legend of Billie Jean and Maximum Overdrive. She moved to Los Angeles in 1986 and received a recurring role in the television series Brothers. In 1987, she auditioned for a role in a series of animated shorts about the Simpson family on The Tracey Ullman Show. Smith intended to audition for the role of Bart Simpson, but the casting director felt her voice was too high, so she was assigned the role of Lisa, instead. She voiced Lisa for three seasons on The Tracey Ullman Show, and in 1989, the shorts were spun off into their own half-hour show, The Simpsons. For her work as the character, Smith received a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Voice-Over Performance in 1992.Alongside The Simpsons, Smith appeared in the sitcom Herman's Head as Louise, and had recurring appearances as Marlene on Dharma & Greg and Penny in two episodes of Dead Like Me. She has appeared in several films, including City Slickers, Just Write, Toys and As Good as It Gets. In 2004, Smith performed her own off-Broadway one-woman show entitled More at the Union Square Theatre in New York City. Aside from The Simpsons, Smith has recorded few voice-over parts, only commercials and the film We're Back! A Dinosaur's Story. Smith starred in and served as executive producer for the independent romantic comedy Waiting For Ophelia, which had its world premiere at the Phoenix Film Festival in April 2009.Smith was married to actor Christopher Grove from 1990 to 1992 and Daniel Erickson from 2002 to 2008. She enjoys writing and painting. During the first season of Herman's Head, Smith taught herself to paint by copying other artists. She released a children's book titled I, Lorelei in 2009 and her story \"The Race\" was included in the book Just Humor Me.\nThe United States of America (USA), commonly known as the United States (U.S. or US) or America, is a country comprising 50 states, a federal district, five major self-governing territories, and various possessions. At 3.8 million sq mi (9.8 million km2), the United States is the world's third or fourth largest country by total area and is slightly smaller than the entire continent of Europe's 3.93 million sq mi (10.2 million km2). With a population of more than 327 million people, the U.S. is the third most populous country. Most of the country is located contiguously in North America between Canada and Mexico. The extremely diverse geography, climate, and wildlife of the United States make it one of the world's 17 megadiverse countries.Paleo-Indians migrated from Siberia to the North American mainland at least 12,000 years ago. European colonization began in the 16th century. The United States emerged from the thirteen British colonies established along the East Coast. Following the French and Indian War, numerous disputes between Great Britain and the colonies led to the American Revolution, which began in 1775, and the subsequent Declaration of Independence in 1776. The war ended in 1783 with the United States becoming the first country to gain independence from a European power. The current constitution was adopted in 1788, with the first ten amendments, collectively named the Bill of Rights, being ratified in 1791 to guarantee many fundamental civil liberties. The United States embarked on a vigorous expansion across North America throughout the 19th century, acquiring new territories, displacing Native American tribes, and gradually admitting new states until it spanned the continent by 1848.During the second half of the 19th century, the Civil War led to the abolition of slavery. By the end of the century, the United States had extended into the Pacific Ocean, and its economy, driven in large part by the Industrial Revolution, began to soar. The Spanish\u2013American War and World War I confirmed the country's status as a global military power. The United States emerged from World War II as a global superpower and a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council. The end of the Cold War and the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 left the United States as the world's sole superpower.The United States is a federal republic and a representative democracy. It is a founding member of the United Nations, World Bank, International Monetary Fund, Organization of American States (OAS), and many other international organizations. The United States is a highly developed country, with the world's largest economy by nominal GDP and second-largest economy by PPP, accounting for approximately a quarter of global GDP. The U.S. economy is largely post-industrial, characterized by the dominance of services and knowledge-based activities, although the manufacturing sector remains the second-largest in the world. The United States is the world's largest importer and the second largest exporter of goods, by value. Although its population is only 4.3% of the world total, the U.S. holds 31% of the total wealth in the world, the largest share of global wealth concentrated in a single country.Despite income and wealth disparities, the United States continues to rank very high in measures of socioeconomic performance, including average wage, human development, per capita GDP, and worker productivity. The United States is the foremost military power in the world, making up a third of global military spending, and is a leading political, cultural, and scientific force internationally.\nEuryphura togoensis, or Suffert's commander, is a butterfly in the family Nymphalidae. It is found in Sierra Leone, Ivory Coast, Ghana, Nigeria, Cameroon and possibly Togo. The habitat consists of forests.Adults are attracted to fallen fruit.\nFirozpur district is one of the twenty-two districts in the state of Punjab, India. Firozpur district comprises an area of 2,190 km2 (850 sq mi).Firozpur is the capital city of the district. It is situated inside ten gates\u2014Amritsari Gate, Wansi Gate, Makhu Gate, Zira Gate, Bagdadi Gate, Mori Gate, Delhi Gate, Magjani Gate, Multani Gate and Kasuri Gate.\nThe Thirteen Colonies, also known as the Thirteen British Colonies or the Thirteen American Colonies, were a group of colonies of Great Britain on the Atlantic coast of America founded in the 17th and 18th centuries which declared independence in 1776 and formed the United States of America. The Thirteen Colonies had very similar political, constitutional, and legal systems and were dominated by Protestant English-speakers. They were part of Britain's possessions in the New World, which also included colonies in Canada, the Caribbean, and Florida.Between 1625 and 1775, the colonial population grew from roughly 2,000 to 2.4 million, displacing American Indians. This population included people subject to a system of slavery which was legal in all of the colonies prior to the American Revolutionary War. In the 18th century, the British government operated its colonies under a policy of mercantilism, in which the central government administered its possessions for the economic benefit of the mother country. The Thirteen Colonies had a high degree of self-governance and active local elections, and they resisted London's demands for more control. The French and Indian War (1754\u201363) against France and its Indian allies led to growing tensions between Britain and the Thirteen Colonies. In the 1750s, the colonies began collaborating with one another instead of dealing directly with Britain. These inter-colonial activities cultivated a sense of shared American identity and led to calls for protection of the colonists' \"Rights as Englishmen\", especially the principle of \"no taxation without representation\". Grievances with the British government led to the American Revolution, in which the colonies collaborated in forming the Continental Congress. The colonists fought the American Revolutionary War (1775\u201383) with the aid of France and, to a significantly smaller degree, the Dutch Republic and Spain.\nTibbi Rang is a village in the Firozpur district of Punjab, India. It is located in the Zira tehsil.\nIndia (born May 17, 1977) is the stage name of a pornographic actress, singer and rapper.She began working as an adult actress in around 1998 and has since appeared in over 200 videos. For five years she was an exclusive contract girl for the production company Video Team, and she has an exclusive sex toy line, manufactured by California Exotic Novelties.India owns the record company Black Widow Entertainment, and in 2006 she released her debut solo album Role Play. She had previously been a member of several girl groups; her first album, Hi Naturally, was released in 1994 when she was in the group Harmony Innocents. In July 2002 she was profiled on VH1's All Access hip-hop/porn special. In 2004 her vocals featured in the movie Walking Tall, starring Dwayne \"The Rock\" Johnson.\n", "path": ["tibbi rang", "firozpur district", "India", "United States of America", "the thirteen colonies"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the indigenous to of the official language of the place of birth of the country location of badnera (vidhan sabha constituency)?", "correct_answer": "England", "model_answer": " [/INST] The indigenous language of the place of birth of the country location of Badnera (Vidhan Sabha constituency) is not mentioned in the context. However, Badnera is a constituency in Amravati district, Mahar", "context": "Paulo Jorge Fernandes Sereno (born 24 October 1983 in Santar\u00e9m, Portugal), known as Gutty Sereno, is a Portuguese professional footballer who plays for Vilafranquense as a midfielder.\nPhilippe Honor\u00e9 (born March 21, 1967)  is a French violinist who has been a regular recitalist in France and the United Kingdom. He was appointed Violin Professor at the Royal Academy of Music  in London September 2012. He has performed widely in broadcast recitals on French radio and television.\nEnglish is a West Germanic language that was first spoken in early medieval England and eventually became a global lingua franca. It is named after the Angles, one of the Germanic tribes that migrated to the area of Great Britain that later took their name, as England. Both names derive from Anglia, a peninsula in the Baltic Sea. The language is closely related to Frisian and Low Saxon, and its vocabulary has been significantly influenced by other Germanic languages, particularly Norse (a North Germanic language), and to a greater extent by Latin and French.English has developed over the course of more than 1,400 years. The earliest forms of English, a group of West Germanic (Ingvaeonic) dialects brought to Great Britain by Anglo-Saxon settlers in the 5th century, are collectively called Old English. Middle English began in the late 11th century with the Norman conquest of England; this was a period in which the language was influenced by French. Early Modern English began in the late 15th century with the introduction of the printing press to London, the printing of the King James Bible and the start of the Great Vowel Shift.Through the worldwide influence of the British Empire, and later the United States, Modern English has been spreading around the world since the 17th century. Through all types of printed and electronic media, and spurred by the emergence of the United States as a global superpower, English has become the leading language of international discourse and the lingua franca in many regions and professional contexts such as science, navigation and law.English is the largest language by number of speakers, and the third most-spoken native language in the world, after Standard Chinese and Spanish. It is the most widely learned second language and is either the official language or one of the official languages in almost 60 sovereign states. There are more people who have learned it as a second language than there are native speakers. It is estimated that there are over 2 billion speakers of English. English is the most commonly spoken language in the United Kingdom, the United States, Canada, Australia, Ireland and New Zealand, and it is widely spoken in some areas of the Caribbean, Africa and South Asia. It is a co-official language of the United Nations, the European Union and many other world and regional international organisations. It is the most widely spoken Germanic language, accounting for at least 70% of speakers of this Indo-European branch. English has a vast vocabulary, though counting how many words any language has is impossible. English speakers are called \"Anglophones\".Modern English grammar is the result of a gradual change from a typical Indo-European dependent marking pattern, with a rich inflectional morphology and relatively free word order, to a mostly analytic pattern with little inflection, a fairly fixed SVO word order and a complex syntax. Modern English relies more on auxiliary verbs and word order for the expression of complex tenses, aspect and mood, as well as passive constructions, interrogatives and some negation. The variation among the accents and dialects of English used in different countries and regions\u2014in terms of phonetics and phonology, and sometimes also vocabulary, grammar, and spelling\u2014can often be understood by speakers of different dialects, but in extreme cases can lead to confusion or even mutual unintelligibility between English speakers.\nIndia (born May 17, 1977) is the stage name of a pornographic actress, singer and rapper.She began working as an adult actress in around 1998 and has since appeared in over 200 videos. For five years she was an exclusive contract girl for the production company Video Team, and she has an exclusive sex toy line, manufactured by California Exotic Novelties.India owns the record company Black Widow Entertainment, and in 2006 she released her debut solo album Role Play. She had previously been a member of several girl groups; her first album, Hi Naturally, was released in 1994 when she was in the group Harmony Innocents. In July 2002 she was profiled on VH1's All Access hip-hop/porn special. In 2004 her vocals featured in the movie Walking Tall, starring Dwayne \"The Rock\" Johnson.\nToreulia imminuta is a species of moth of the Tortricidae family. It is found in Ecuador in the provinces of Napo and Morona-Santiago.The wingspan is 15\u201319 mm.  The ground colour of the forewings is whitish creamy, suffused and strigulated (fine streaks) with rusty brown. The hindwings are creamy with brownish suffusions.\nEngland is a country that is part of the United Kingdom. It shares land borders with Wales to the west and Scotland to the north. The Irish Sea lies west of England and the Celtic Sea to the southwest. England is separated from continental Europe by the North Sea to the east and the English Channel to the south. The country covers five-eighths of the island of Great Britain, which lies in the North Atlantic, and includes over 100 smaller islands, such as the Isles of Scilly and the Isle of Wight.The area now called England was first inhabited by modern humans during the Upper Palaeolithic period, but takes its name from the Angles, a Germanic tribe deriving its name from the Anglia peninsula, who settled during the 5th and 6th centuries. England became a unified state in the 10th century, and since the Age of Discovery, which began during the 15th century, has had a significant cultural and legal impact on the wider world. The English language, the Anglican Church, and English law \u2013 the basis for the common law legal systems of many other countries around the world \u2013 developed in England, and the country's parliamentary system of government has been widely adopted by other nations. The Industrial Revolution began in 18th-century England, transforming its society into the world's first industrialised nation.England's terrain is chiefly low hills and plains, especially in central and southern England. However, there is upland and mountainous terrain in the north (for example, the Lake District and Pennines) and in the west (for example, Dartmoor and the Shropshire Hills). The capital is London, which has the largest metropolitan area in both the United Kingdom and the European Union. England's population of over 55 million comprises 84% of the population of the United Kingdom, largely concentrated around London, the South East, and conurbations in the Midlands, the North West, the North East, and Yorkshire, which each developed as major industrial regions during the 19th century.The Kingdom of England \u2013 which after 1535 included Wales \u2013 ceased being a separate sovereign state on 1 May 1707, when the Acts of Union put into effect the terms agreed in the Treaty of Union the previous year, resulting in a political union with the Kingdom of Scotland to create the Kingdom of Great Britain. In 1801, Great Britain was united with the Kingdom of Ireland (through another Act of Union) to become the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland. In 1922 the Irish Free State seceded from the United Kingdom, leading to the latter being renamed the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.\nBadnera (Vidhan Sabha constituency) is one of the 288 constituencies of Maharashtra Vidhan Sabha and one of the eight which are located in Amravati district.It is a part of the Amravati (Lok Sabha constituency) along with five other Vidhan Sabha assembly constituencies, viz. Amravati, Teosa, Daryapur (SC), Melghat (ST) and Achalpur.The remaining two Dhamangaon Railway and Morshi constituencies are part of the Wardha (Lok Sabha constituency) in the adjoining Wardha district.As per orders of Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly constituencies Order, 2008, No. 37 Badnera (Vidhan Sabha constituency) is composed of the following: 1. Amravati Tehsil (Part), Revenue Circle \u2013 Amravati and Badnera, 2. Amravati (M.Corp.)\u2013Ward No. 6 to 18, 32 to 40, 57 to 61, 72,73, 3. Bhatkuli Tehsil (Part), Revenue Circle \u2013 Bhatkuli and Nimbha. of the district.\nThe United States of America (USA), commonly known as the United States (U.S. or US) or America, is a country comprising 50 states, a federal district, five major self-governing territories, and various possessions. At 3.8 million sq mi (9.8 million km2), the United States is the world's third or fourth largest country by total area and is slightly smaller than the entire continent of Europe's 3.93 million sq mi (10.2 million km2). With a population of more than 327 million people, the U.S. is the third most populous country. Most of the country is located contiguously in North America between Canada and Mexico. The extremely diverse geography, climate, and wildlife of the United States make it one of the world's 17 megadiverse countries.Paleo-Indians migrated from Siberia to the North American mainland at least 12,000 years ago. European colonization began in the 16th century. The United States emerged from the thirteen British colonies established along the East Coast. Following the French and Indian War, numerous disputes between Great Britain and the colonies led to the American Revolution, which began in 1775, and the subsequent Declaration of Independence in 1776. The war ended in 1783 with the United States becoming the first country to gain independence from a European power. The current constitution was adopted in 1788, with the first ten amendments, collectively named the Bill of Rights, being ratified in 1791 to guarantee many fundamental civil liberties. The United States embarked on a vigorous expansion across North America throughout the 19th century, acquiring new territories, displacing Native American tribes, and gradually admitting new states until it spanned the continent by 1848.During the second half of the 19th century, the Civil War led to the abolition of slavery. By the end of the century, the United States had extended into the Pacific Ocean, and its economy, driven in large part by the Industrial Revolution, began to soar. The Spanish\u2013American War and World War I confirmed the country's status as a global military power. The United States emerged from World War II as a global superpower and a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council. The end of the Cold War and the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 left the United States as the world's sole superpower.The United States is a federal republic and a representative democracy. It is a founding member of the United Nations, World Bank, International Monetary Fund, Organization of American States (OAS), and many other international organizations. The United States is a highly developed country, with the world's largest economy by nominal GDP and second-largest economy by PPP, accounting for approximately a quarter of global GDP. The U.S. economy is largely post-industrial, characterized by the dominance of services and knowledge-based activities, although the manufacturing sector remains the second-largest in the world. The United States is the world's largest importer and the second largest exporter of goods, by value. Although its population is only 4.3% of the world total, the U.S. holds 31% of the total wealth in the world, the largest share of global wealth concentrated in a single country.Despite income and wealth disparities, the United States continues to rank very high in measures of socioeconomic performance, including average wage, human development, per capita GDP, and worker productivity. The United States is the foremost military power in the world, making up a third of global military spending, and is a leading political, cultural, and scientific force internationally.\nWataru Sasaki (\u4f50\u3005\u6728 \u6e09, Sasaki Wataru, born July 28, 1996 in Mitaka, Tokyo) is a Japanese football player for Kamatamare Sanuki.\n", "path": ["badnera (vidhan sabha constituency)", "India", "United States of America", "English", "England"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the occupation of lucian tapiedi?", "correct_answer": "clergy", "model_answer": " [/INST] Answer: Lucian Tapiedi was an Anglican teacher.\n\nExplanation: From the context provided, Lucian Tapiedi is identified as one of the \"New Guinea Martyrs,\" who were eight", "context": "Clergy are formal leaders within established religions.  Their roles and functions vary in different religious traditions, but usually involve presiding over specific rituals and teaching their religion's doctrines and practices. Some of the terms used for individual clergy are clergyman, clergywoman, and churchman. Less common terms are churchwoman and clergyperson,  while cleric and clerk in holy orders both have a long history but are rarely used. In Christianity, the specific names and roles of the clergy vary by denomination and there is a wide range of formal and informal clergy positions, including deacons, elders, priests, bishops, preachers, pastors, ministers and the Pope. In Islam, a religious leader is often known formally or informally as an imam, qadi, mufti, mullah, or ayatollah. In the Jewish tradition, a religious leader is often a rabbi (teacher) or hazzan (cantor).\nLucian Tapiedi (c.\u20091921 \u2013 1942) was a Papuan Anglican teacher who was one of the \"New Guinea Martyrs.\"  The Martyrs were eight Anglican clergy, teachers, and medical missionaries killed by the Japanese in 1942 (a total of 333 church workers of all denominations were killed during the invasion).\nThe Cabochien revolt was an episode in the civil war between the Armagnacs and the Burgundians which was in turn a part of the Hundred Years' War.In the spring of 1413, John the Fearless, duke of Burgundy, managed to raise the people of Paris and impose a reform called the Cabochien ordinance. However, after several months, Parisians desiring a return to order supported return of the Armagnacs.On 23 November 1407, Louis, Duke of Orl\u00e9ans, brother of king Charles VI (known as \"Charles the Beloved\" and \"Charles the Mad\"), was murdered by masked assassins in the service of John the Fearless. Afterwards, John acquired considerable popularity among the population of Paris.He aligned himself with a popular faction of butchers, the \u00e9corcheurs (flayers), named \u201cCabochiens\u201d, after their commander, a butcher named Simon Lecoustellier, known as Simon Caboche. This group had its origins among butchers of the Grande Boucherie de Paris, a relatively wealthy class of tradespeople not integrated within Parisian high & aristocratic class. In April 1413, in a bid to gain power, John the Fearless encouraged the Cabochiens to revolt. Riotous mobs, sporting distinctive white caps, assaulted Armagnac noblemen and followers, and their properties throughout the city. On April 27, they seized the Bastille Saint-Antoine and took prisoner its defender, Pierre des Essarts, Provost of Paris. (Pierre des  Essarts was beheaded the following 13 July.) They also forced their way into the H\u00f4tel Saint-Pol, the royal residence, arrested several of the king's men, and incarcerated them in the various prisons of Paris. They controlled Paris for four months, until the last days of July and beginning of August, when the revolt was put down.Academics took this opportunity to propose administrative reforms known as the \u201cOrdonnance cabochienne\",  which limited the power of the monarch, giving, for example, greater fiscal control to the Estates General. Although the ordinance carried the name of Caboche, because it was published on 26\u201327 May 1413 during the Cabochian revolt, it had been prepared in January\u2013February 1413 by the \u00c9tats g\u00e9n\u00e9raux de Langue d'O\u00efl. It was actually the work of advisors of John of Burgundy who imposed the ordinance on Charles VI, who signed it on 22 May 1413.However, the exactions of the Cabochiens and of the Burgundians were causing increasing dissatisfaction among the population who began to rise against the Cabochiens. On 2\u20133 August, the Cabochiens revolt was over. The Cabochiens who were unable to flee were executed and the ordinance was overturned on 5 September 1413. Simon Caboche was able to escape with the Duke of Burgundy.Charles d\u2019Orl\u00e9ans, son of the murdered duke of Orl\u00e9ans, had married Bonne d\u2019Armagnac, daughter of the count Bernard VII of Armagnac. The count was a brutal and powerful lord who commanded a number of troops from the Adour and Garonne. Putting himself at the disposal of his son-in-law, he took control of Paris. In recognition of his help, Bernard VII d'Armagnac was made Constable of France on 30 December 1415 in a letter signed by Charles VI.\nCzechowiec [t\u0361\u0282\u025b\u02c8x\u0254vj\u025bt\u0361s] is a village in the administrative district of Gmina \u017bytno, within Radomsko County, \u0141\u00f3d\u017a Voivodeship, in central Poland. It lies approximately 9 kilometres (6 mi) south-east of \u017bytno, 28 km (17 mi) south-east of Radomsko, and 103 km (64 mi) south of the regional capital \u0141\u00f3d\u017a.\nDunbar James Douglas, 6th Earl of Selkirk FRS (22 April 1809 \u2013 11 April 1885) was a Scottish peer.\nRhagoletis blanchardi is a species of tephritid or fruit flies in the genus Rhagoletis of the family Tephritidae.\n", "path": ["lucian tapiedi", "clergy"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the indigenous to of the language used of the country location of gomugomuwa?", "correct_answer": "England", "model_answer": " [/INST] The indigenous language of the country location of Gomugomuwa is Sinhalese.\n\nExplanation:\nGomugomuwa is a village located in Sri Lanka. Sri Lanka is a country in", "context": "Noor Ali Tabandeh (Persian: \u0646\u0648\u0631\u0639\u0644\u06cc \u062a\u0627\u0628\u0646\u062f\u0647\u200e, born 13 October 1927 (Solar Hijri calendar: 21 Mehr 1306)) also known by the title Majzoub Ali Shah, is the spiritual leader or Qutb of the Ni'matullahi (Sultan Ali Shahi) Gonabadi Order in Iran, which is the largest Sufi order in Iran. He was born in Beydokht, Gonabad, Iran.During his time within the Ministry of Justice and working as an attorney, Tabandeh made considerable efforts to support the human and social rights of Iranians, for which he has been imprisoned and suffered numerous persecutions. To a recent crackdown of the regime on followers of the Gonabadi order, he is currently being held under house arrest by the authorities.\nEngland is a country that is part of the United Kingdom. It shares land borders with Wales to the west and Scotland to the north. The Irish Sea lies west of England and the Celtic Sea to the southwest. England is separated from continental Europe by the North Sea to the east and the English Channel to the south. The country covers five-eighths of the island of Great Britain, which lies in the North Atlantic, and includes over 100 smaller islands, such as the Isles of Scilly and the Isle of Wight.The area now called England was first inhabited by modern humans during the Upper Palaeolithic period, but takes its name from the Angles, a Germanic tribe deriving its name from the Anglia peninsula, who settled during the 5th and 6th centuries. England became a unified state in the 10th century, and since the Age of Discovery, which began during the 15th century, has had a significant cultural and legal impact on the wider world. The English language, the Anglican Church, and English law \u2013 the basis for the common law legal systems of many other countries around the world \u2013 developed in England, and the country's parliamentary system of government has been widely adopted by other nations. The Industrial Revolution began in 18th-century England, transforming its society into the world's first industrialised nation.England's terrain is chiefly low hills and plains, especially in central and southern England. However, there is upland and mountainous terrain in the north (for example, the Lake District and Pennines) and in the west (for example, Dartmoor and the Shropshire Hills). The capital is London, which has the largest metropolitan area in both the United Kingdom and the European Union. England's population of over 55 million comprises 84% of the population of the United Kingdom, largely concentrated around London, the South East, and conurbations in the Midlands, the North West, the North East, and Yorkshire, which each developed as major industrial regions during the 19th century.The Kingdom of England \u2013 which after 1535 included Wales \u2013 ceased being a separate sovereign state on 1 May 1707, when the Acts of Union put into effect the terms agreed in the Treaty of Union the previous year, resulting in a political union with the Kingdom of Scotland to create the Kingdom of Great Britain. In 1801, Great Britain was united with the Kingdom of Ireland (through another Act of Union) to become the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland. In 1922 the Irish Free State seceded from the United Kingdom, leading to the latter being renamed the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.\nAli Ya\u011fmur (born 1 January 1943) is a Turkish former wrestler who competed in the 1972 Summer Olympics.\nSri Lanka (UK: , US:  (listen); Sinhala: \u0dc1\u0dca\u200d\u0dbb\u0dd3 \u0dbd\u0d82\u0d9a\u0dcf \u015ar\u012b La\u1e43k\u0101; Tamil: \u0b87\u0bb2\u0b99\u0bcd\u0b95\u0bc8 Ila\u1e45kai), officially the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka, is an island country in South Asia, located in the Indian Ocean to the southwest of the Bay of Bengal and to the southeast of the Arabian Sea. The island is geographically separated from the Indian subcontinent by the Gulf of Mannar and the Palk Strait. The legislative capital, Sri Jayawardenepura Kotte, is a suburb of the commercial capital and largest city, Colombo.Sri Lanka's documented history spans 3,000 years, with evidence of pre-historic human settlements dating back to at least 125,000 years. It has a rich cultural heritage and the first known Buddhist writings of Sri Lanka, the P\u0101li Canon, date back to the Fourth Buddhist council in 29 BC. Its geographic location and deep harbours made it of great strategic importance from the time of the ancient Silk Road through to the modern Maritime Silk Road.Sri Lanka was known from the beginning of British colonial rule as Ceylon (, US also ). A nationalist political movement arose in the country in the early 20th century to obtain political independence, which was granted in 1948; the country became a republic and adopted its current name in 1972. Sri Lanka's recent history has been marred by a 26-year civil war, which ended decisively when the Sri Lanka Armed Forces defeated the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) in 2009.The current constitution stipulates the political system as a republic and a unitary state governed by a semi-presidential system. It has had a long history of international engagement, as a founding member of the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC), and a member of the United Nations, the Commonwealth of Nations, the G77, and the Non-Aligned Movement. Along with the Maldives, Sri Lanka is one of only two South Asian countries rated \"high\" on the Human Development Index (HDI), with its HDI rating and per capita income the highest among South Asian nations. The Sri Lankan constitution accords Buddhism the \"foremost place\", although it does not identify it as a state religion. Buddhism is given special privileges in the Sri Lankan constitution.The island is home to many cultures, languages and ethnicities. The majority of the population are from the Sinhalese ethnicity, while a large minority of Tamils have also played an influential role in the island's history. Moors, Burghers, Malays, Chinese, and the indigenous Vedda are also established groups on the island.\nTekoulo  is a town and sub-prefecture in the Gu\u00e9ck\u00e9dou Prefecture in the Nz\u00e9r\u00e9kor\u00e9 Region of south-western Guinea.\nGomugomuwa is a village located in Paduwasnuwara Provincial Council, Kurunegala District, Sri Lanka and is 5 km away from Kuliyapitiya Town. The Gomugomuwa area is divided into two parts, Ihala Gomugomuwa and Pahala Gomugomuwa. Coconut and rice cultivation are the main economic activities in this area.\nEnglish is a West Germanic language that was first spoken in early medieval England and eventually became a global lingua franca. It is named after the Angles, one of the Germanic tribes that migrated to the area of Great Britain that later took their name, as England. Both names derive from Anglia, a peninsula in the Baltic Sea. The language is closely related to Frisian and Low Saxon, and its vocabulary has been significantly influenced by other Germanic languages, particularly Norse (a North Germanic language), and to a greater extent by Latin and French.English has developed over the course of more than 1,400 years. The earliest forms of English, a group of West Germanic (Ingvaeonic) dialects brought to Great Britain by Anglo-Saxon settlers in the 5th century, are collectively called Old English. Middle English began in the late 11th century with the Norman conquest of England; this was a period in which the language was influenced by French. Early Modern English began in the late 15th century with the introduction of the printing press to London, the printing of the King James Bible and the start of the Great Vowel Shift.Through the worldwide influence of the British Empire, and later the United States, Modern English has been spreading around the world since the 17th century. Through all types of printed and electronic media, and spurred by the emergence of the United States as a global superpower, English has become the leading language of international discourse and the lingua franca in many regions and professional contexts such as science, navigation and law.English is the largest language by number of speakers, and the third most-spoken native language in the world, after Standard Chinese and Spanish. It is the most widely learned second language and is either the official language or one of the official languages in almost 60 sovereign states. There are more people who have learned it as a second language than there are native speakers. It is estimated that there are over 2 billion speakers of English. English is the most commonly spoken language in the United Kingdom, the United States, Canada, Australia, Ireland and New Zealand, and it is widely spoken in some areas of the Caribbean, Africa and South Asia. It is a co-official language of the United Nations, the European Union and many other world and regional international organisations. It is the most widely spoken Germanic language, accounting for at least 70% of speakers of this Indo-European branch. English has a vast vocabulary, though counting how many words any language has is impossible. English speakers are called \"Anglophones\".Modern English grammar is the result of a gradual change from a typical Indo-European dependent marking pattern, with a rich inflectional morphology and relatively free word order, to a mostly analytic pattern with little inflection, a fairly fixed SVO word order and a complex syntax. Modern English relies more on auxiliary verbs and word order for the expression of complex tenses, aspect and mood, as well as passive constructions, interrogatives and some negation. The variation among the accents and dialects of English used in different countries and regions\u2014in terms of phonetics and phonology, and sometimes also vocabulary, grammar, and spelling\u2014can often be understood by speakers of different dialects, but in extreme cases can lead to confusion or even mutual unintelligibility between English speakers.\nHegi Castle (German: Schloss Hegi) is a castle in the city of Winterthur of the canton of Zurich in Switzerland. It is a Swiss heritage site of national significance.\n", "path": ["gomugomuwa", "Sri Lanka", "English", "England"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the headquarters location of the country location of jaca?", "correct_answer": "Barcelona", "model_answer": " [/INST] Answer: Jaca is a city located in the province of Huesca, in northeastern Spain.\n\nExplanation: Jaca was an ancient fort on the Arag\u00f3n River and the capital city of the County and Kingdom of", "context": "The Siberian sculpin (Cottus sibiricus) is a species of fish in the family Cottidae. It is found in Siberian river basins of the Arctic Ocean from the Ob to Yana rivers.It reaches a maximum length of 15.0 cm\nCatalunya R\u00e0dio (Catalan pronunciation: [k\u0259t\u0259\u02c8lu\u0272\u0259 \u02c8ra\u00f0i.u]) is Catalonia's public radio network. With headquarters in Barcelona, it is part of the Corporaci\u00f3 Catalana de Mitjans Audiovisuals (CCMA), owned by the Generalitat de Catalunya. Catalunya R\u00e0dio broadcasts exclusively in Catalan and is the major Catalan-language network today, although R\u00e0dio 4 from Radio Nacional de Espa\u00f1a (founded in 1976) was the first post-Franco Era station to broadcast in the language.Catalunya R\u00e0dio began broadcasting on 20 June 1983. Over the years, it has expanded to encompass four separate stations:Catalunya R\u00e0dio - The first station, and the one that gave the network its name. A generalist station that broadcasts 24 hours a day and is the third largest radio station in Catalonia by audience size.Catalunya M\u00fasica - Founded on 10 May 1987, Catalunya M\u00fasica concentrates on classical and contemporary music, plus specialized music programmes. It broadcasts 24 hours a day.Catalunya Informaci\u00f3 - Created on 11 September 1992, Catalunya Informaci\u00f3 was Spain's first all-news station. It broadcasts 24 hours a day.iCat fm - Launched on 23 April 2006, this a multi-media radio station closely linked to the Internet and promoting both traditional and contemporary culture.Catalunya R\u00e0dio has grown significantly since its inception, and is currently available in Catalonia, Valencia, the Balearic Islands, Northern Catalonia, La Franja, and Andorra.\nSCM Anywhere is SQL Server-based software configuration management tool with integrated revision control, bug tracking and build automation. It supports integration with CruiseControl.NET and ANT. Developed by Dynamsoft.SCM Anywhere is a client/server system. The server manages a central database and a master repository of file versions. Users work on files in a local client working folder and submit changed files together in changesets. On-premises software and Software as a service editions available.Integration with Visual SourceSafe compatible IDEs is supported as well as Cross-platform.\nJaca  (in Aragonese: Chaca or Xaca) is a city of northeastern Spain in the province of Huesca, located near the Pyrenees and the border with France. Jaca is an ancient fort on the Arag\u00f3n River, situated at the crossing of two great early medieval routes, one from Pau to Zaragoza. Jaca was the city out of which the County and Kingdom of Aragon developed.  It was the capital of Aragon until 1097 and also the capital of Jacetania.\nBarcelona ( BAR-s\u0259-LOH-n\u0259, Catalan: [b\u0259\u027es\u0259\u02c8lon\u0259], Spanish: [ba\u027ese\u02c8lona]) is a city in Spain. It is the capital and largest city of the autonomous community of Catalonia, as well as the second most populous municipality of Spain. With a population of 1.6 million within city limits, its urban area extends to numerous neighbouring municipalities within the Province of Barcelona and is home to around 4.8 million people, making it the sixth most populous urban area in the European Union after Paris, London, Madrid, the Ruhr area and Milan. It is one of the largest metropolises on the Mediterranean Sea, located on the coast between the mouths of the rivers Llobregat and Bes\u00f2s, and bounded to the west by the Serra de Collserola mountain range, the tallest peak of which is 512 metres (1,680 feet) high.Founded as a Roman city, in the Middle Ages Barcelona became the capital of the County of Barcelona. After merging with the Kingdom of Aragon, Barcelona continued to be an important city in the Crown of Aragon as an economic and administrative centre of this Crown and the capital of the Principality of Catalonia. Barcelona has a rich cultural heritage and is today an important cultural centre and a major tourist destination. Particularly renowned are the architectural works of Antoni Gaud\u00ed and Llu\u00eds Dom\u00e8nech i Montaner, which have been designated UNESCO World Heritage Sites. The headquarters of the Union for the Mediterranean are located in Barcelona. The city is known for hosting the 1992 Summer Olympics as well as world-class conferences and expositions and also many international sport tournaments.Barcelona is one of the world's leading tourist, economic, trade fair and cultural centres, and its influence in commerce, education, entertainment, media, fashion, science, and the arts all contribute to its status as one of the world's major global cities. It is a major cultural and economic centre in southwestern Europe, 24th in the world (before Z\u00fcrich, after Frankfurt) and a financial centre. In 2008 it was the fourth most economically powerful city by GDP in the European Union and 35th in the world with GDP amounting to \u20ac177 billion. In 2012 Barcelona had a GDP of $170 billion; and it was leading Spain in employment rate in that moment.In 2009 the city was ranked Europe's third and one of the world's most successful as a city brand. In the same year the city was ranked Europe's fourth best city for business and fastest improving European city, with growth improved by 17% per year, and the city has been experiencing strong and renewed growth for the past three years. Since 2011 Barcelona has been a leading smart city in Europe. Barcelona is a transport hub, with the Port of Barcelona being one of Europe's principal seaports and busiest European passenger port, an international airport, Barcelona\u2013El Prat Airport, which handles over 50 million passengers per year, an extensive motorway network, and a high-speed rail line with a link to France and the rest of Europe.\nThe 1989 Penn State Nittany Lions football team represented the Pennsylvania State University in the 1989 NCAA Division I-A football season. The team was coached by Joe Paterno and played its home games in Beaver Stadium in University Park, Pennsylvania.\nDr. David R. Holsinger is an American composer and conductor writing primarily for concert band.  Holsinger is a graduate of Hardin-Central High School in Hardin, Missouri, Central Methodist University, the University of Central Missouri, and the University of Kansas. He is well known across the nation as well as the world for his outstanding work for his differentiating time signatures throughout his pieces.\n", "path": ["jaca", "Spain", "Barcelona"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the country location of the capital of the country location of citizenship of robert stewart munn?", "correct_answer": "United States of America", "model_answer": " [/INST] The capital of the country where Robert Stewart Munn was a Scottish-born merchant and politician is Scotland in Europe. Munn was born in Bute, which is a town in Scotland. Therefore, Scotland is the country location of Munn's", "context": "Tarini Desai (Gujarati: \u0aa4\u0abe\u0ab0\u0abf\u0aa3\u0ac0 \u0aa6\u0ac7\u0ab8\u0abe\u0a88) is Gujarati short story writer from Gujarat, India.\nThe United States of America (USA), commonly known as the United States (U.S. or US) or America, is a country comprising 50 states, a federal district, five major self-governing territories, and various possessions. At 3.8 million sq mi (9.8 million km2), the United States is the world's third or fourth largest country by total area and is slightly smaller than the entire continent of Europe's 3.93 million sq mi (10.2 million km2). With a population of more than 327 million people, the U.S. is the third most populous country. Most of the country is located contiguously in North America between Canada and Mexico. The extremely diverse geography, climate, and wildlife of the United States make it one of the world's 17 megadiverse countries.Paleo-Indians migrated from Siberia to the North American mainland at least 12,000 years ago. European colonization began in the 16th century. The United States emerged from the thirteen British colonies established along the East Coast. Following the French and Indian War, numerous disputes between Great Britain and the colonies led to the American Revolution, which began in 1775, and the subsequent Declaration of Independence in 1776. The war ended in 1783 with the United States becoming the first country to gain independence from a European power. The current constitution was adopted in 1788, with the first ten amendments, collectively named the Bill of Rights, being ratified in 1791 to guarantee many fundamental civil liberties. The United States embarked on a vigorous expansion across North America throughout the 19th century, acquiring new territories, displacing Native American tribes, and gradually admitting new states until it spanned the continent by 1848.During the second half of the 19th century, the Civil War led to the abolition of slavery. By the end of the century, the United States had extended into the Pacific Ocean, and its economy, driven in large part by the Industrial Revolution, began to soar. The Spanish\u2013American War and World War I confirmed the country's status as a global military power. The United States emerged from World War II as a global superpower and a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council. The end of the Cold War and the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 left the United States as the world's sole superpower.The United States is a federal republic and a representative democracy. It is a founding member of the United Nations, World Bank, International Monetary Fund, Organization of American States (OAS), and many other international organizations. The United States is a highly developed country, with the world's largest economy by nominal GDP and second-largest economy by PPP, accounting for approximately a quarter of global GDP. The U.S. economy is largely post-industrial, characterized by the dominance of services and knowledge-based activities, although the manufacturing sector remains the second-largest in the world. The United States is the world's largest importer and the second largest exporter of goods, by value. Although its population is only 4.3% of the world total, the U.S. holds 31% of the total wealth in the world, the largest share of global wealth concentrated in a single country.Despite income and wealth disparities, the United States continues to rank very high in measures of socioeconomic performance, including average wage, human development, per capita GDP, and worker productivity. The United States is the foremost military power in the world, making up a third of global military spending, and is a leading political, cultural, and scientific force internationally.\nCanada (Canadian French: [kanad\u0251] listen ) is a country in the northern part of North America. Its ten provinces and three territories extend from the Atlantic to the Pacific and northward into the Arctic Ocean, covering 9.98 million square kilometres (3.85 million square miles), making it the world's second-largest country by total area. Its southern border with the United States, stretching some 8,891 kilometres (5,525 mi), is the world's longest bi-national land border. Canada's capital is Ottawa, and its three largest metropolitan areas are Toronto, Montreal, and Vancouver.As a whole, Canada is sparsely populated, the majority of its land area being dominated by forest and tundra. Its population is highly urbanized, with over 80 percent of its inhabitants concentrated in large and medium-sized cities, and 70 percent of citizens residing within 100 kilometres (62 mi) of the southern border. Canada's climate varies widely across its vast area, ranging from arctic weather in the north, to hot summers in the southern regions, with four distinct seasons.Various indigenous peoples have inhabited what is now Canada for thousands of years before European colonization. Beginning in the 16th century, British and French expeditions explored and later settled along the Atlantic coast. As a consequence of various armed conflicts, France ceded nearly all of its colonies in North America in 1763. In 1867, with the union of three British North American colonies through Confederation, Canada was formed as a federal dominion of four provinces. This began an accretion of provinces and territories and a process of increasing autonomy from the United Kingdom. This widening autonomy was highlighted by the Statute of Westminster of 1931 and culminated in the Canada Act of 1982, which severed the vestiges of legal dependence on the British parliament.Canada is a parliamentary democracy and a constitutional monarchy in the Westminster tradition, with Elizabeth II as its queen and a prime minister who serves as the chair of the Cabinet and head of government. The country is a realm within the Commonwealth of Nations, a member of the Francophonie and officially bilingual at the federal level. It ranks among the highest in international measurements of government transparency, civil liberties, quality of life, economic freedom, and education. It is one of the world's most ethnically diverse and multicultural nations, the product of large-scale immigration from many other countries. Canada's long and complex relationship with the United States has had a significant impact on its economy and culture.A developed country, Canada has the sixteenth-highest nominal per capita income globally as well as the twelfth-highest ranking in the Human Development Index. Its advanced economy is the tenth-largest in the world, relying chiefly upon its abundant natural resources and well-developed international trade networks. Canada is part of several major international and intergovernmental institutions or groupings including the United Nations, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, the G7 (formerly G8), the Group of Ten, the G20, the North American Free Trade Agreement and the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum.\nRund\u0113ni parish (Latvian: Rund\u0113nu pagasts) is located in a southwest of Ludza District in Latvia, borders on the Pildas, Nirza, Lauderu and Istras parishes (all: Ludza District), the \u0160kaunes and Ezernieku parishes (both: Kr\u0101slava District) and the Kaunatas parish (Rezekne District). Distances: from parish centre - village of Rund\u0113ni up to District centre - Ludza is 33 km, up to the Capital of Latvia - Riga - 315 km.\nIssy Bonn (21 April 1903 \u2013 21 April 1977) was a British actor, singer and comedian, most famous for his recording of My Yiddishe Momme. He appeared in two films, I Thank You in 1941 and Discoveries in 1939, where he played Mr. Schwitzer.Bonn was born Binyamin Levin, he chose the name Benny Levine as an early stage name, and that morphed to become Issy Bonn.Bonn played on BBC Radio music shows, and in music halls before retiring to become a theatrical agent. His image appears on the cover of The Beatles album Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band. He died on his 74th birthday in London, UK, where he was born.\nThe ASB Auckland Marathon and Half Marathon is an annual marathon running race held in Auckland, New Zealand. The event is held in October or early November of each year, which is during the spring in New Zealand. The main feature of the event is the crossing of the Auckland Harbour Bridge, which involves a climb of 33 metres to the highest point. The 2018 event is scheduled for Sunday 28 October 2018.\nRobert Stewart Munn (August 23, 1829 \u2013 December 17, 1894) was a Scottish-born merchant and politician in Newfoundland. He represented Harbour Grace in the Newfoundland House of Assembly as a Reform Party member from 1889 until his death in 1894.The son of Dugald Munn, a banker, and Elizabeth Stewart, he was born in Bute and came to Newfoundland in 1851 to join the firm of Punton and Munn, which was then owned by his uncle John Munn. In 1862, Munn became manager of the firm's operation in Harbour Grace. In the same year, he married Elizabeth Munden. In 1872, Munn and his cousin William Punton Munn became partners in the business, now known as John Munn and Company. When William went to England due to poor health in 1881, Munn became the sole manager.He was elected to the Newfoundland assembly in 1889 and reelected in 1893.A decline in the price of fish had resulted in accumulating debt for John Munn and Company during the 1890s. The Union Bank in St. John's, which held most of that debt, failed in 1894.Munn died of pleurisy in Harbour Grace at the age of 65. His estate was declared insolvent and the company went bankrupt soon afterwards.\nOttawa ( (listen), ; French pronunciation: \u200b[\u0254tawa]) is the capital city of Canada. It stands on the south bank of the Ottawa River in the eastern portion of southern Ontario. Ottawa borders Gatineau, Quebec; the two form the core of the Ottawa\u2013Gatineau census metropolitan area (CMA) and the National Capital Region (NCR). As of 2016, Ottawa had a city population of 934,243 and a metropolitan population of 1,323,783 making it the fourth-largest city and the fifth-largest CMA in Canada. In June 2019, the City of Ottawa estimated it had surpassed a population of 1 million.Founded in 1826 as Bytown, and incorporated as Ottawa in 1855, the city has evolved into the political centre of Canada. Its original boundaries were expanded through numerous annexations and were ultimately replaced by a new city incorporation and amalgamation in 2001 which significantly increased its land area. The city name \"Ottawa\" was chosen in reference to the Ottawa River, the name of which is derived from the Algonquin Odawa, meaning \"to trade\".Ottawa has the most educated population among Canadian cities and is home to a number of post-secondary, research, and cultural institutions, including the National Arts Centre, the National Gallery, and numerous national museums. Ottawa has the highest standard of living in the nation and low unemployment.\n", "path": ["robert stewart munn", "Canada", "Ottawa", "United States of America"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the location of the legislative body of the country location of the located in the administrative terroritorial entity of crayford?", "correct_answer": "palace of westminster", "model_answer": " [/INST] Crayford is a town and electoral ward located in south-east London, England, within the London Borough of Bexley. It is not the location of the legislative body of the United Kingdom, which is the Parliament of the", "context": "The Parliament of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, commonly known internationally as the UK Parliament, British Parliament, or Westminster Parliament, and domestically simply as Parliament or Westminster, is the supreme legislative body of the United Kingdom, the Crown dependencies and the British Overseas Territories.  It alone possesses legislative supremacy and thereby ultimate power over all other political bodies in the UK and the overseas territories. Parliament is bicameral but has three parts, consisting of the Sovereign (the Queen-in-Parliament), the House of Lords, and the House of Commons (the primary chamber). The two houses meet in the Palace of Westminster in the City of Westminster, one of the inner boroughs of the capital city, London.The House of Lords includes two different types of members: the Lords Spiritual, consisting of the most senior bishops of the Church of England, and the Lords Temporal, consisting mainly of life peers, appointed by the Sovereign on the advice of the Prime Minister, and of 92 hereditary peers, sitting either by virtue of holding a royal office, or by being elected by their fellow hereditary peers. Prior to the opening of the Supreme Court in October 2009, the House of Lords also performed a judicial role through the Law Lords.The House of Commons is an elected chamber with elections to 650 single member constituencies held at least every five years under the first-past-the-post system. The two Houses meet in separate chambers in the Palace of Westminster (commonly known as the Houses of Parliament) in London. By constitutional convention, all government ministers, including the Prime Minister, are members of the House of Commons or, less commonly, the House of Lords and are thereby accountable to the respective branches of the legislature. Most cabinet ministers are from the Commons, whilst junior ministers can be from either House. However, the Leader of the House of Lords must be a peer.The Parliament of Great Britain was formed in 1707 following the ratification of the Treaty of Union by Acts of Union passed by the Parliament of England and the Parliament of Scotland, both Acts of Union stating, \"That the United Kingdom of Great Britain be represented by one and the same Parliament to be styled The Parliament of Great Britain\". At the start of the 19th century, Parliament was further enlarged by Acts of Union ratified by the Parliament of Great Britain and the Parliament of Ireland that abolished the latter and added 100 Irish MPs and 32 Lords to the former to create the Parliament of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland. The Royal and Parliamentary Titles Act 1927 formally amended the name to the \"Parliament of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland\", five years after the secession of the Irish Free State in 1922.With the global expansion of the British Empire, the UK Parliament has shaped the political systems of many countries as ex-colonies and so it has been called the \"Mother of Parliaments\". However, John Bright \u2013 who coined the epithet \u2013 used it in reference to the political culture of \"England\" rather than just the parliamentary system.In theory, the UK's supreme legislative power is officially vested in the Crown-in-Parliament. However, the Crown normally acts on the advice of the Prime Minister and the powers of the House of Lords are limited to only delaying legislation; thus power is de facto vested in the House of Commons.\nThe Palace of Westminster serves as the meeting place of the House of Commons and the House of Lords, the two houses of the Parliament of the United Kingdom. Commonly known as the Houses of Parliament after its occupants, the Palace lies on the north bank of the River Thames in the City of Westminster, in central London, England.Its name, which derives from the neighbouring Westminster Abbey, may refer to either of two structures: the Old Palace, a medieval building-complex destroyed by fire in 1834, or its replacement, the New Palace that stands today. The palace is owned by the monarch in right of the Crown and, for ceremonial purposes, retains its original status as a royal residence. Committees appointed by both houses manage the building and report to the Speaker of the House of Commons and to the Lord Speaker.The first royal palace constructed on the site dated from the 11th century, and Westminster became the primary residence of the Kings of England until fire destroyed much of the complex in 1512. After that, it served as the home of the Parliament of England, which had met there since the 13th century, and also as the seat of the Royal Courts of Justice, based in and around Westminster Hall. In 1834 an even greater fire ravaged the heavily rebuilt Houses of Parliament, and the only significant medieval structures to survive were Westminster Hall, the Cloisters of St Stephen's, the Chapel of St Mary Undercroft, and the Jewel Tower.In the subsequent competition for the reconstruction of the Palace, the architect Charles Barry won with a design for new buildings in the Gothic Revival style, specifically inspired by the English Perpendicular Gothic style of the 14th\u201316th centuries. The remains of the Old Palace (except the detached Jewel Tower) were incorporated into its much larger replacement, which contains over 1,100 rooms organised symmetrically around two series of courtyards and which has a floor area of 112,476 m2 (1,210,680 sq ft). Part of the New Palace's area of 3.24 hectares (8 acres) was reclaimed from the River Thames, which is the setting of its nearly 300-metre long (980 ft) fa\u00e7ade, called the River Front. Augustus Pugin, a leading authority on Gothic architecture and style, assisted Barry and  designed the interior of the Palace. Construction started in 1840 and lasted for 30 years, suffering great delays and cost overruns, as well as the death of both leading architects; works for the interior decoration continued intermittently well into the 20th century. Major conservation work has taken place since then to reverse the effects of London's air pollution, and extensive repairs followed the Second World War, including the reconstruction of the Commons Chamber following its bombing in 1941.The Palace is one of the centres of political life in the United Kingdom; \"Westminster\" has become a metonym for the UK Parliament and the British Government, and the Westminster system of government commemorates the name of the palace. The Elizabeth Tower, in particular, often referred to by the name of its main bell, Big Ben, has become an iconic landmark of London and of the United Kingdom in general, one of the most popular tourist attractions in the city, and an emblem of parliamentary democracy. Tsar Nicholas I of Russia called the new palace \"a dream in stone\".The Palace of Westminster has been a Grade I listed building since 1970 and part of a UNESCO World Heritage Site since 1987.\nThe London Borough of Bexley  (listen) is a London borough in south-east London. It has common borders with the London Borough of Bromley to the south, the Royal Borough of Greenwich to the west, across the River Thames to the north it borders the London Borough of Havering, the London Borough of Barking and Dagenham and there is a small boundary with the unitary authority of Thurrock in Essex to the north-east. There is a border with the Borough of Dartford to the east and Sevenoaks district to the south-east, both being in the ceremonial county of Kent. The London Borough of Bexley is within the Thames Gateway, an area designated as a national priority for urban regeneration. The local authority is Bexley London Borough Council.\nMaurice Denuzi\u00e8re (born 29 August 1926 in Saint-\u00c9tienne) is a French journalist and writer.\nThe United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, commonly known as the United Kingdom (UK) or Britain, is a sovereign country located off the north-western coast of the European mainland. The United Kingdom includes the island of Great Britain, the north-eastern part of the island of Ireland, and many smaller islands. Northern Ireland is the only part of the United Kingdom that shares a land border with another sovereign state, the Republic of Ireland. Apart from this land border, the United Kingdom is surrounded by the Atlantic Ocean, with the North Sea to the east, the English Channel to the south and the Celtic Sea to the south-west, giving it the 12th-longest coastline in the world. The Irish Sea lies between Great Britain and Ireland. The United Kingdom's 242,500 square kilometres (93,600 sq mi) were home to an estimated 66.0 million inhabitants in 2017.The United Kingdom is a unitary parliamentary democracy and constitutional monarchy. The current monarch is Queen Elizabeth II, who has reigned since 1952, making her the world's longest-serving current head of state. The United Kingdom's capital and largest city is London, a global city and financial centre with an urban area population of 10.3 million. Other major cities include Birmingham, Manchester, Glasgow, Leeds and Liverpool.The United Kingdom consists of four constituent countries: England, Scotland, Wales, and Northern Ireland. Their capitals are London, Edinburgh, Cardiff, and Belfast, respectively. Apart from England, the countries have their own devolved governments, each with varying powers, but such power is delegated by the Parliament of the United Kingdom, which may enact laws unilaterally altering or abolishing devolution (England does not have any devolved power). The nearby Isle of Man, Bailiwick of Guernsey and Bailiwick of Jersey are not part of the UK, being Crown dependencies with the British Government responsible for defence and international representation. The medieval conquest and subsequent annexation of Wales by the Kingdom of England, followed by the union between England and Scotland in 1707 to form the Kingdom of Great Britain, and the union in 1801 of Great Britain with the Kingdom of Ireland created the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland. Five-sixths of Ireland seceded from the UK in 1922, leaving the present formulation of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. There are fourteen British Overseas Territories, the remnants of the British Empire which, at its height in the 1920s, encompassed almost a quarter of the world's land mass and was the largest empire in history. British influence can be observed in the language, culture and political systems of many of its former colonies.The United Kingdom is a developed country and has the world's fifth-largest economy by nominal GDP and ninth-largest economy by purchasing power parity. It has a high-income economy and has a very high Human Development Index rating, ranking 14th in the world. It was the world's first industrialised country and the world's foremost power during the 19th and early 20th centuries. The UK remains a great power, with considerable economic, cultural, military, scientific and political influence internationally. It is a recognised nuclear weapons state and is sixth in military expenditure in the world. It has been a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council since its first session in 1946. It has been a leading member state of the European Union (EU) and its predecessor, the European Economic Community (EEC), since 1973; however, a referendum in 2016 resulted in 51.9 per cent of UK voters favouring leaving the European Union, and the country's exit is being negotiated. The United Kingdom is also a member of the Commonwealth of Nations, the Council of Europe, the G7, the G20, NATO, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), Interpol and the World Trade Organization (WTO).\nCrayford is a town and electoral ward located in south-east London, England within the London Borough of Bexley. It lies east of Bexleyheath and north west of Dartford. Crayford is in the historic county of Kent. The settlement developed around a ford over the river Cray, that is no longer used.\nJamaal May is an American poet from Detroit. May was included in the Best American Poetry anthology from 2014.\n(4489) 1988 AK, provisional designation 1988 AK, is a large Jupiter trojan from the Greek camp, approximately 90 kilometers (56 miles) in diameter. It was discovered on 15 January 1988, by American astronomer Edward Bowell at the Anderson Mesa Station of the Lowell Observatory near Flagstaff, Arizona, in the United States. The dark D-type asteroid belongs to the 50 largest Jupiter trojans and has a rotation period of 12.58 hours. It has not yet been named since its numbering in June 1990.\nClyde Norman Shealy, M.D., Ph.D. is a North American neurosurgeon that some in alternative medicine claim to be pioneer in pain medicine. He is credited with the invention of transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulator, spinal cord stimulator, and radiofrequency ablation for back pain arising from facet arthropathy.\n", "path": ["crayford", "london borough of bexley", "United Kingdom", "parliament of the united kingdom", "palace of westminster"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the country location of origin of the continent of the country location of the participant of of jim watters?", "correct_answer": "Sweden", "model_answer": " [/INST] Answer: Jim Watters is a Canadian. Canada is a country located in North America.\n\nExplanation: Jim Watters is identified as a Canadian in the context given. Canada is a country located in North America.</s>", "context": "Sweden (Swedish: Sverige [\u02c8sv\u00e6rj\u025b] (listen)), formal name: the Kingdom of Sweden (Swedish: Konungariket Sverige ), is a Scandinavian Nordic country in Northern Europe. It borders Norway to the west and north and Finland to the east, and is connected to Denmark in the southwest by a bridge-tunnel across the \u00d6resund, a strait at the Swedish-Danish border. At 450,295 square kilometres (173,860 sq mi), Sweden is the largest country in Northern Europe, the third-largest country in the European Union and the fifth largest country in Europe by area. Sweden has a total population of 10.3 million of which 2.5 million have a foreign background. It has a low population density of 22 inhabitants per square kilometre (57/sq mi). The highest concentration is in the central and southern half of the country.Sweden is part of the geographical area of Fennoscandia. The climate is in general very mild for its northerly latitude due to significant maritime influence. In spite of the high latitude, Sweden often has warm continental summers, being located in between the North Atlantic, the Baltic Sea and the vast Eurasian Russian landmass. The general climate and environment varies significantly from the south and north due to the vast latitudal difference and much of Sweden has reliably cold and snowy winters. It also has a vast coastline with many offshore islands, many lakes, a large proportion of the country covered by forests and includes a portion of the Scandinavian Mountains.Germanic peoples have inhabited Sweden since prehistoric times, emerging into history as the Geats (Swedish G\u00f6tar) and Swedes (Svear) and constituting the sea peoples known as the Norsemen. Southern Sweden is predominantly agricultural, while the north is heavily forested.  Today,  the sovereign state of Sweden is a constitutional monarchy and parliamentary democracy, with a monarch as head of state, like its neighbour Norway. The capital city is Stockholm, which is also the most populous city in the country. Legislative power is vested in the 349-member unicameral Riksdag. Executive power is exercised by the government chaired by the prime minister. Sweden is a unitary state, currently divided into 21 counties and 290 municipalities.An independent Swedish state emerged during the early 12th century. After the Black Death in the middle of the 14th century killed about a third of the Scandinavian population, the Hanseatic League threatened Scandinavia's culture, finances and languages. This led to the forming of the Scandinavian Kalmar Union in 1397, which Sweden left in 1523. When Sweden became involved in the Thirty Years War on the Reformist side, an expansion of its territories began and eventually the Swedish Empire was formed. This became one of the great powers of Europe until the early 18th century. Swedish territories outside the Scandinavian Peninsula were gradually lost during the 18th and 19th centuries, ending with the annexation of present-day Finland by Russia in 1809. The last war in which Sweden was directly involved was in 1814, when Norway was militarily forced into personal union. Since then, Sweden has been at peace, maintaining an official policy of neutrality in foreign affairs. The union with Norway was peacefully dissolved in 1905. Sweden was formally neutral through both world wars and the Cold War, albeit Sweden has since 2009 openly moved towards cooperation with NATO. Sweden has close relations to its Nordic neighbours, including linguistically, with the Swedish language being an official language in Finland and Swedish also being mutually intelligible with Danish and Norwegian.After the end of the Cold War, Sweden joined the European Union (EU) on 1 January 1995, but declined NATO membership, as well as Eurozone (EZ) membership following a referendum. It is also a member of the United Nations, the Nordic Council, the Council of Europe, the World Trade Organization and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). Sweden maintains a Nordic social welfare system that provides universal health care and tertiary education for its citizens. It has the world's eleventh-highest per capita income and ranks highly in numerous metrics of national performance, including quality of life, health, education, protection of civil liberties, economic competitiveness, equality, prosperity and human development.\nVasyl Petrovych Tsushko (Ukrainian: \u0412\u0430\u0441\u0438\u043b\u044c \u041f\u0435\u0442\u0440\u043e\u0432\u0438\u0447 \u0426\u0443\u0448\u043a\u043e; born February 1, 1963 in Nadrichne, Tarutyne Raion, Odessa Oblast) is a Ukrainian politician former Minister of Internal Affairs of Ukraine, appointed on quote of the Communist Party, and former Minister of Internal Affairs of Ukraine.From July 2010 to August 2011 he was the party-leader of the Socialist Party of Ukraine.\nAustria ( (listen), ; German: \u00d6sterreich [\u02c8\u00f8\u02d0st\u0250ra\u026a\u00e7] (listen)), officially the Republic of Austria (German: Republik \u00d6sterreich, listen ), is a country in Central Europe comprising nine federated states. Its capital, largest city and one of nine states is Vienna. Austria has an area of 83,879 km2 (32,386 sq mi), a population of nearly nine million people and a nominal GDP of $477 billion. It is bordered by the Czech Republic and Germany to the north, Hungary and Slovakia to the east, Slovenia and Italy to the south, and Switzerland and Liechtenstein to the west. The terrain is landlocked and highly mountainous, lying within the Alps; only 32% of the country is below 500 m (1,640 ft), and its highest point is 3,798 m (12,461 ft). The majority of the population speaks local Bavarian dialects as their native language, and German in its standard form is the country's official language. Other regional languages are Hungarian, Burgenland Croatian, and Slovene.Austria played a central role in European History from the late 18th to the early 20th century. It initially emerged as a margraviate around 976 and developed into a duchy and later archduchy. In the 16th century, Austria started serving as the heart of the Habsburg Monarchy and the junior branch of the House of Habsburg \u2013 one of the most influential royal houses in history. As archduchy, it was a major component and administrative centre of the Holy Roman Empire. Following the Holy Roman Empire's dissolution, Austria founded its own empire in the 19th century, which became a great power and the leading force of the German Confederation. Subsequent to the Austro-Prussian War and the establishment of a union with Hungary, the Austro-Hungarian Empire was created. Austria was involved in both world wars; it started the first one under Emperor Franz Joseph and was the birthplace of Adolf Hitler, who provoked the second one.Austria is a parliamentary representative democracy with a President as head of state and a Chancellor as head of government. Major urban areas of Austria include Graz, Linz, Salzburg and Innsbruck. Austria is consistently ranked as one of the richest countries in the world by per capita GDP terms. The country has developed a high standard of living and in 2018 was ranked 20th in the world for its Human Development Index. The republic declared its perpetual neutrality in foreign political affairs in 1955. Austria has been a member of the United Nations since 1955 and joined the European Union in 1995. It harbours the OSCE and OPEC and is a founding member of the OECD and Interpol. Austria also signed the Schengen Agreement in 1995, and adopted the euro currency in 1999.\nJim Watters (born January 30, 1946 in Vancouver, British Columbia) is a Canadian former pair skater.  With partner Faye Strutt, he won the bronze medal at the Canadian Figure Skating Championships in 1964 and 1965 and competed in the 1964 Winter Olympics.\nGnevkow is a municipality in the Mecklenburgische Seenplatte district, in Mecklenburg-Vorpommern, Germany.\nThe 1964 Winter Olympics, officially known as the IX Olympic Winter Games (French: Les IXes Jeux olympiques d'hiver)  (German: Olympische Winterspiele 1964), was a winter multi-sport event which was celebrated in Innsbruck, Austria, from January 29 to February 9, 1964. The Games included 1091 athletes from 36 nations, and the Olympic Torch was carried by Joseph Rieder, a former alpine skier who had participated in the 1956 Winter Olympics.The Games were affected by the deaths of Australian alpine skier Ross Milne and British luge slider Kazimierz Kay-Skrzypeski, during training, and by the deaths, three years earlier, of the entire US figure skating team and family members.\nEurope is a Swedish rock band formed in Upplands V\u00e4sby in 1979,  by vocalist Joey Tempest, guitarist John Norum, bassist Peter Olsson, and drummer Tony Reno. They got a major breakthrough in Sweden in 1982 by winning the televised competition \"Rock-SM\" (Swedish Rock Championships): it was the first time this competition was held, and Europe became a larger success than the competition itself.Since their formation, Europe has released eleven studio albums, three live albums, three compilations and twenty-four music videos.Europe rose to international fame in the 1980s with their third album, 1986's The Final Countdown, which has sold over 3 million copies in the United States and 15 million copies worldwide (including album and single). Europe have sold over 25 million records worldwide.  The band has had two top 20 albums on the Billboard 200 chart (The Final Countdown  and Out of This World) and three top 30 singles on the Billboard Hot 100 chart (\"The Final Countdown\", \"Rock the Night\" and \"Carrie\").Europe went on hiatus in 1992, reunited temporarily for a one-off performance in Stockholm on New Year's Eve 1999 and announced an official reunion in 2003. Since then the band has released six albums, Start from the Dark (2004), Secret Society (2006), Last Look at Eden (2009), Bag of Bones (2012), War of Kings (2015) and Walk the Earth (2017).Europe has achieved new attention in the US due to being featured in a GEICO Insurance cable television commercial campaign viewed for many months across the US in 2015\u201316.The band is mainly influenced by Whitesnake, Deep Purple, Rainbow, Led Zeppelin, Thin Lizzy, UFO and Michael Schenker Group.\nAgnes Milowka (23 December 1981 \u2013 27 February 2011) was an Australian technical diver, underwater photographer, author, maritime archaeologist and cave explorer.She gained international recognition for penetrating deeper than previous explorers into cave systems across Australia and Florida, and as a public speaker and author on the subjects of diving and maritime archaeology.  She died aged 29 while diving in a confined space.\nIgor Markovich Yefimov or Igor Efimov (Russian: \u0418\u0301\u0433\u043e\u0440\u044c \u041c\u0430\u0301\u0440\u043a\u043e\u0432\u0438\u0447 \u0415\u0444\u0438\u0301\u043c\u043e\u0432; born August 8, 1937, Moscow) is an American philosopher, historian, writer and publisher of Russian origin. Some of his works were published under the pen name Andrei Moscovit. Together with Boris Vakhtin, Sergei Dovlatov, Vladimir Gubin, and Vladimir Maramzin, he founded the Leningrad writers' group \"Townspeople\" (Gorozhane), whose works circulated in samizdat. He is also the founder of Hermitage Publishers; a company specializing in Russian writers.\n", "path": ["jim watters", "1964 winter olympics", "Austria", "Europe", "Sweden"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the legislative body of the country location of origin of the continent of the country location of citizenship of magdalena szaj?", "correct_answer": "the riksdag", "model_answer": " [/INST] The legislative body of the country of origin of Magdalena Szaj is the Polish parliament, or Sejm. Poland is a sovereign state located in Central Europe, with a constitutional monarchy and parliamentary democracy system. The Polish parliament", "context": "Poland (Polish: Polska [\u02c8p\u0254lska] (listen)), officially the Republic of Poland (Polish: Rzeczpospolita Polska [\u0290\u025bt\u0361\u0282p\u0254\u02c8sp\u0254lita \u02c8p\u0254lska] (listen)), is a country located in Central Europe. It is divided into 16 administrative subdivisions, covering an area of 312,696 square kilometres (120,733 sq mi), and has a largely temperate seasonal climate. With a population of approximately 38.5 million people, Poland is the sixth most populous member state of the European Union. Poland's capital and largest metropolis is Warsaw. Other major cities include Krak\u00f3w, \u0141\u00f3d\u017a, Wroc\u0142aw, Pozna\u0144, Gda\u0144sk, and Szczecin.Poland is bordered by the Baltic Sea, Lithuania, and Russia's Kaliningrad Oblast to the north, Belarus and Ukraine to the east, Slovakia and the Czech Republic to the south, and Germany to the west.The establishment of the Polish state can be traced back to AD 966, when Mieszko I, ruler of the realm coextensive with the territory of present-day Poland, converted to Christianity. The Kingdom of Poland was founded in 1025, and in 1569 it cemented its longstanding political association with the Grand Duchy of Lithuania by signing the Union of Lublin. This union formed the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth, one of the largest (about 1,000,000 square kilometres (390,000 sq mi)) and most populous countries of 16th and 17th century Europe, with a uniquely liberal political system which adopted Europe's first written national constitution, the Constitution of 3 May 1791.More than a century after the Partitions of Poland at the end of the 18th century, Poland regained its independence in 1918 with the Treaty of Versailles. In September 1939, World War II started with the invasion of Poland by Germany, followed by the Soviet Union invading Poland in accordance with the Molotov\u2013Ribbentrop Pact. More than six million Polish citizens, including 90% of the country's Jews, perished in the war. In 1947, the Polish People's Republic was established as a satellite state under Soviet influence. In the aftermath of the Revolutions of 1989, most notably through the emergence of the Solidarity movement, Poland reestablished itself as a presidential democratic republic.Poland has a developed market and is a regional power in Central Europe, with the largest Stock Exchange in the East-Central European zone. It has the sixth largest economy by GDP (PPP) in the European Union and one of the most dynamic economies in the world, simultaneously achieving a very high rank on the Human Development Index. Poland is a developed country, which maintains a high-income economy along with very high standards of living, life quality, safety, education, and economic freedom. The country has a developed school educational system, and  also provides free university education, state-funded social security, and a universal health care system for all citizens. Poland has 16 UNESCO World Heritage Sites, 15 of which are cultural. Poland is a member state of the European Union, the Schengen Area, the United Nations, NATO, the OECD, the Three Seas Initiative, and the Visegr\u00e1d Group.\nThe Humble Administrator's Garden (Chinese: \u62d9\u653f\u56ed; pinyin: Zhu\u014dzh\u00e8ng yu\u00e1n; Suzhou Wu: Wu Chinese pronunciation: [tso\u0294 tsen \u0266y\u00f8]) is a Chinese garden in Suzhou, a UNESCO World Heritage Site and one of the most famous of the gardens of Suzhou. The garden is located at 178 Northeast Street (\u4e1c\u5317\u8857178\u53f7), Gusu District.At 78 mu (\u4ea9) (5.2 ha; 13 acres), it is the largest garden in Suzhou and is considered by some to be the finest garden in all of southern China.\nAntoni Jach (born 8 May 1956) is an Australian novelist, painter and playwright. His most recent novel is Napoleon's Double, a narrative enlisting history and philosophy for its own neo-baroque ends. His previous novels are The Weekly Card Game, a tragicomic study of quotidian repetition and The Layers of the City, a meditation on contemporary Paris, civilisation and barbarism (which was shortlisted for The Age Book of the Year Fiction Award and was translated into Turkish under the title Sehrin Katmanlari).Antoni is also the author of a book of poetry, An Erratic History, an idiosyncratic history of Australia and two plays, Miss Furr and Miss Skeene and Waiting for Isabella. He is the creator of a series of artist videos and his paintings have been on display in an exhibition at Le Globo in Paris. He is the publisher at Modern Writing Press, is as an editorial adviser at the literary journal, Heat, holds a PhD from the University of Melbourne and has a painting featured on the cover of Antipodes, the literary journal of the American Association for Australian Literary Studies\nThe Riksdag (Swedish: riksdagen or Sveriges riksdag) is the national legislature and the supreme decision-making body of Sweden. Since 1971, the Riksdag has been a unicameral legislature with 349 members (riksdagsledam\u00f6ter), elected proportionally and serving, from 1994 onwards, on fixed four-year terms.The constitutional functions of the Riksdag are enumerated in the Instrument of Government (Regeringsformen), and its internal workings are specified in greater detail in the Riksdag Act (Riksdagsordningen).The seat of the Riksdag is at Parliament House (Swedish: Riksdagshuset), on the island of Helgeandsholmen in the central parts of Stockholm. The Riksdag has its institutional roots in the feudal Riksdag of the Estates, by tradition thought to have first assembled in Arboga in 1435, and in 1866 following reforms of the 1809 Instrument of Government that body was transformed into a bicameral legislature with an upper chamber (F\u00f6rsta Kammaren) and a lower chamber (Andra Kammaren).The most recent general election was held on 9 September 2018.\nEurope is a Swedish rock band formed in Upplands V\u00e4sby in 1979,  by vocalist Joey Tempest, guitarist John Norum, bassist Peter Olsson, and drummer Tony Reno. They got a major breakthrough in Sweden in 1982 by winning the televised competition \"Rock-SM\" (Swedish Rock Championships): it was the first time this competition was held, and Europe became a larger success than the competition itself.Since their formation, Europe has released eleven studio albums, three live albums, three compilations and twenty-four music videos.Europe rose to international fame in the 1980s with their third album, 1986's The Final Countdown, which has sold over 3 million copies in the United States and 15 million copies worldwide (including album and single). Europe have sold over 25 million records worldwide.  The band has had two top 20 albums on the Billboard 200 chart (The Final Countdown  and Out of This World) and three top 30 singles on the Billboard Hot 100 chart (\"The Final Countdown\", \"Rock the Night\" and \"Carrie\").Europe went on hiatus in 1992, reunited temporarily for a one-off performance in Stockholm on New Year's Eve 1999 and announced an official reunion in 2003. Since then the band has released six albums, Start from the Dark (2004), Secret Society (2006), Last Look at Eden (2009), Bag of Bones (2012), War of Kings (2015) and Walk the Earth (2017).Europe has achieved new attention in the US due to being featured in a GEICO Insurance cable television commercial campaign viewed for many months across the US in 2015\u201316.The band is mainly influenced by Whitesnake, Deep Purple, Rainbow, Led Zeppelin, Thin Lizzy, UFO and Michael Schenker Group.\nMetti Oli (The vibrance of metti, an ornament worn by married women) is a Tamil soap opera that aired Monday through Friday on Sun TV for 811 episodes. The Metti Oli team has been awarded several awards, including the Kalaimamani from the Tamilnadu State Government. The show is retelecast in (SGold) Moon TV from September 2018.The show starred Delhi Kumar, Kaveri, Gayathri, Vanaja, Uma, Rekha Vardharaja, Chetan, Neelima Rani and Thirumurugan among others. It was produced by Cine Times Entertainment S. Siddique, writer and director by Thirumurugan.It was shot in several locations such as Alagankulam Village, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, Singapore and Malaysia and New York City. It was also aired in Sri Lanka Tamil Channel on Shakthi TV.\nMagdalena Szaj (born 12 February 1995) is a Polish football midfielder, currently playing for FFC Turbine Potsdam.\nSweden (Swedish: Sverige [\u02c8sv\u00e6rj\u025b] (listen)), formal name: the Kingdom of Sweden (Swedish: Konungariket Sverige ), is a Scandinavian Nordic country in Northern Europe. It borders Norway to the west and north and Finland to the east, and is connected to Denmark in the southwest by a bridge-tunnel across the \u00d6resund, a strait at the Swedish-Danish border. At 450,295 square kilometres (173,860 sq mi), Sweden is the largest country in Northern Europe, the third-largest country in the European Union and the fifth largest country in Europe by area. Sweden has a total population of 10.3 million of which 2.5 million have a foreign background. It has a low population density of 22 inhabitants per square kilometre (57/sq mi). The highest concentration is in the central and southern half of the country.Sweden is part of the geographical area of Fennoscandia. The climate is in general very mild for its northerly latitude due to significant maritime influence. In spite of the high latitude, Sweden often has warm continental summers, being located in between the North Atlantic, the Baltic Sea and the vast Eurasian Russian landmass. The general climate and environment varies significantly from the south and north due to the vast latitudal difference and much of Sweden has reliably cold and snowy winters. It also has a vast coastline with many offshore islands, many lakes, a large proportion of the country covered by forests and includes a portion of the Scandinavian Mountains.Germanic peoples have inhabited Sweden since prehistoric times, emerging into history as the Geats (Swedish G\u00f6tar) and Swedes (Svear) and constituting the sea peoples known as the Norsemen. Southern Sweden is predominantly agricultural, while the north is heavily forested.  Today,  the sovereign state of Sweden is a constitutional monarchy and parliamentary democracy, with a monarch as head of state, like its neighbour Norway. The capital city is Stockholm, which is also the most populous city in the country. Legislative power is vested in the 349-member unicameral Riksdag. Executive power is exercised by the government chaired by the prime minister. Sweden is a unitary state, currently divided into 21 counties and 290 municipalities.An independent Swedish state emerged during the early 12th century. After the Black Death in the middle of the 14th century killed about a third of the Scandinavian population, the Hanseatic League threatened Scandinavia's culture, finances and languages. This led to the forming of the Scandinavian Kalmar Union in 1397, which Sweden left in 1523. When Sweden became involved in the Thirty Years War on the Reformist side, an expansion of its territories began and eventually the Swedish Empire was formed. This became one of the great powers of Europe until the early 18th century. Swedish territories outside the Scandinavian Peninsula were gradually lost during the 18th and 19th centuries, ending with the annexation of present-day Finland by Russia in 1809. The last war in which Sweden was directly involved was in 1814, when Norway was militarily forced into personal union. Since then, Sweden has been at peace, maintaining an official policy of neutrality in foreign affairs. The union with Norway was peacefully dissolved in 1905. Sweden was formally neutral through both world wars and the Cold War, albeit Sweden has since 2009 openly moved towards cooperation with NATO. Sweden has close relations to its Nordic neighbours, including linguistically, with the Swedish language being an official language in Finland and Swedish also being mutually intelligible with Danish and Norwegian.After the end of the Cold War, Sweden joined the European Union (EU) on 1 January 1995, but declined NATO membership, as well as Eurozone (EZ) membership following a referendum. It is also a member of the United Nations, the Nordic Council, the Council of Europe, the World Trade Organization and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). Sweden maintains a Nordic social welfare system that provides universal health care and tertiary education for its citizens. It has the world's eleventh-highest per capita income and ranks highly in numerous metrics of national performance, including quality of life, health, education, protection of civil liberties, economic competitiveness, equality, prosperity and human development.\nInspired Media Entertainment, also known as Left Behind Games, was a Christian-themed gaming company most notable for its work on Left Behind: Eternal Forces. The company closed their office, shut down operations, and laid off all of their employers at the end of 2011.\n", "path": ["magdalena szaj", "Poland", "Europe", "Sweden", "the riksdag"]}
{"result": [0, null], "question": "What is the capital of the place of birth of the different from of Leo I?", "correct_answer": "sarmizegetusa regia", "model_answer": " [/INST] The capital of the place of birth of Leo I, who was originally known as Flavius Valerius Leo Augustus and later called Leo the Thracian, is Dacia, specifically the region of Dacia Aureliana near historic", "context": "Sarmizegetusa Regia, also Sarmisegetusa, Sarmisegethusa, Sarmisegethuza, \u0396\u03b1\u03c1\u03bc\u03b9\u03b6\u03b5\u03b3\u03b5\u03b8\u03bf\u03cd\u03c3\u03b1 (Zarmizegetho\u00fasa) or \u0396\u03b5\u03c1\u03bc\u03b9\u03b6\u03b5\u03b3\u03b5\u03b8\u03bf\u03cd\u03c3\u03b7 (Zermizegetho\u00fas\u0113), was the capital and the most important military, religious and political centre of the Dacians prior to the wars with the Roman Empire. Erected on top of a 1200 m high mountain, the fortress, comprising six citadels, was the core of a strategic defensive system in the Or\u0103\u015ftie Mountains (in present-day Romania).Sarmizegetusa Regia should not be confused with Ulpia Traiana Sarmizegetusa, the Roman capital of Dacia built by Roman Emperor Trajan some 40 km away, which was not the Dacian capital. Sarmizegetusa Ulpia was discovered earlier, was known already in the early 1900s, and was initially mistaken for the Dacian capital, a confusion which led to incorrect conclusions being made regarding the military history and organization of the Dacians.\nJulie de Bona (born 7 December 1980) is a French actress.\nThe 2002 World Karate Championships are the 16th edition of the World Karate Championships, and were held in Madrid, Spain from November 21 to November 24, 2002.\nPope Leo I (c. 400 \u2013 10 November 461), also known as Saint Leo the Great, was Bishop of Rome from 29 September 440 and died in 461. Pope Benedict XVI said that Leo's papacy \"...was undoubtedly one of the most important in the Church's history.\"He was a Roman aristocrat, and was the first pope to have been called \"the Great\". He is perhaps best known for having met Attila the Hun in 452 and persuading him to turn back from his invasion of Italy. He is also a Doctor of the Church, most remembered theologically for issuing the Tome of Leo, a document which was a major foundation to the debates of the Ecumenical Council of Chalcedon. The Council of Chalcedon, the fourth ecumenical council, dealt primarily with Christology, and elucidated the orthodox definition of Christ's being as the hypostatic union of two natures, divine and human, united in one person, \"with neither confusion nor division\". It was followed by a major schism associated with Monophysitism, Miaphysitism and Dyophysitism.\nJames Heighe Blake (11 June 1768 \u2013 29 July 1819) was a physician, and the third mayor of Washington, D.C., elected by the council of aldermen in 1813 and serving until 1817.\nLeo I (Latin: Flavius Valerius Leo Augustus; 401 \u2013 18 January 474) was Eastern Roman Emperor from 457 to 474. A native of Dacia Aureliana near historic Thrace, he was known as Leo the Thracian (Greek: \u039b\u03ad\u03c9\u03bd \u0391' \u1f41 \u0398\u03c1\u1fb7\u03be Le\u014dn ho Thrax).Ruling the Eastern Empire for nearly 20 years, Leo proved to be a capable ruler. He oversaw many ambitious political and military plans, aimed mostly at aiding the faltering Western Roman Empire and recovering its former territories. He is notable for being the first Eastern Emperor to legislate in Koine Greek rather than Late Latin.He is commemorated as a Saint in the Orthodox Church, with his feast day on January 20.\nIn ancient geography, especially in Roman sources, Dacia ([\u02c8da\u02d0kja]; English ) was the land inhabited by the Dacians. The Greeks referred to them as the Getae (east of Dacia) and the Romans called them Daci.Dacia was bounded in the south approximately by the Danubius river (Danube), in Greek sources the Istros, or at its greatest extent, by the Haemus Mons. Moesia (Dobruja), a region south-east of the Danube, was a core area where the Getae lived and interacted with the Ancient Greeks. In the east it was bounded by the Pontus Euxinus (Black Sea) and the river Danastris (Dniester), in Greek sources the Tyras. But several Dacian settlements are recorded between the rivers Dniester and Hypanis (Southern Bug), and the Tisia (Tisza) to the west.At times Dacia included areas between the Tisa and the Middle Danube. The Carpathian Mountains are located in the middle of Dacia. It thus corresponds to the present-day countries of Romania and Moldova, as well as smaller parts of Bulgaria, Serbia, Hungary, Poland, Slovakia and Ukraine.A Dacian Kingdom of variable size existed between 82 BC until the Roman conquest in AD 106. The capital of Dacia, Sarmizegetusa, located in modern Romania, was destroyed by the Romans, but its name was added to that of the new city (Ulpia Traiana Sarmizegetusa) built by the latter to serve as the capital of the Roman province of Dacia.\nAuratonota nugax is a species of moth of the Tortricidae family. It is found in Ecuador.The wingspan is about 11 mm. The costal half of the forewings is yellowish and the dorsal half is more creamy. The hindwings are pale brownish cream, but more fuscous apically.\n", "path": ["Leo I", "Leo I the Thracian", "dacia", "sarmizegetusa regia"]}
